Advanced Tutorial phenix.xtriage - translational NCS (tNCS)

Today we are going to learn about examining
translational non-crystallographic symmetry (translational NCS) using Xtriage. You might want to watch the introductory Xtriage
tutorial first if you haven't used Xtriage before. You can think of solving a challenging structure
as a treasure hunt. The treasures are the problems. Once you've found them all and fixed them
or accounted for them, you get to solve your structure. Today's treasure is going to be: Translational NCS In separate tutorials we will cover Twinning,
Ice rings and the Wrong space group. We will illustrate each situation with an
Xtriage analysis of datasets from the Phenix tutorial called "Advanced Xtriage" Translational NCS or tNCS occurs when the
asymmetric unit of your crystal contains two or more copies of a molecule related by a
simple translation. Here are the three copies of one chain in
the asymmetric unit of the 1J4R dataset. Notice that they are related by pure translations
of 1/3, -1/3, -1/3. The symptom of translational NCS is a strong
peak in the Patterson function corresponding to the translation between copies of your
molecule. This is the first thing to check for in looking
for tNCS. The Xtriage output for the 1J4R dataset points
out that there is a huge Patterson peak at 1/3, -1/3, -1/3, with a height of 63% of the
origin. Over 20% is generally considered strong translational
NCS The effect of translational NCS is to create
a pattern of alternating strong and weak reflections. This leads to a systematic broadening of the
distribution of amplitudes and intensities. Let's look at this is a little detail. At first we will look at amplitudes, as it
is easier to see the effects of the NCS. Then we will look at intensities (the squares
of the amplitudes). After scaling the data to remove the resolution
dependent fall-off of intensity, the amplitudes of reflections from an untwinned crystal without
translational NCS are distributed according to the Wilson distribution. This is indicated by the red "Expected" curve For acentric reflections the Wilson distribution
looks a little like a Gaussian. If your crystal has translational NCS, the
amplitudes tend to be either very weak or very strong, and the distribution is broader
than for a normal crystal, as in this distribution for the 1J4R dataset This broadening of the distribution can be
seen in two ways in Xtriage. Xtriage uses the intensities instead of amplitudes,
but the consequences are similar. First, the Wilson ratio, the mean square intensity
divided by mean intensity, squared, for this dataset is 2.4, much larger than the 2.0 expected
for an ideal untwinned crystal. Second, a cumulative intensity plot shows
that for acentric reflections in the 1J4R dataset there are more weak reflections than
for acentric reflections in an ideal untwinned dataset. The plot for acentric reflections in the 1J4R
dataset goes up more quickly than for the ideal dataset. Note that you can get a similar intensity
plot if your data are exceptionally noisy. If your crystal has translational NCS, you
should use the L-test when analyzing twinning because tNCS can mask twinning, use a translational
NCS-corrected likelihood target such as the one in Phaser in molecular replacement, and
if you calculate an omit map, be sure to omit corresponding parts of all copies of your
molecule or you won't really be making an omit map. 

