Advanced Tutorial phenix.xtriage - Space Group Identification, Ice rings & Wilson Plot

xfToday we are going to learn about Wilson
plots, ice rings and space group determination using Xtriage. In these Xriage tutorials we are thinking
of solving a challenging structure as a treasure hunt. The treasures are the problems. Once you've found them all and fixed them
or accounted for them, you get to solve your structure. In a the first two Advanced Xtriage tutorials
we covered Translational NCS and Twinning. Today's treasures are going to be: Ice rings and the Wrong space group We will illustrate each situation with an
Xtriage analysis of datasets from the Phenix tutorial called "Advanced Xtriage" We are going to use plots of intensity versus
resolution to tell us whether the diffraction from our crystal looks like the diffraction
from a macromolecule and whether there are any indications of data collection problems,
such as ice rings interfering with measurements of diffraction spots or anisotropy in the
diffraction pattern indicating more disorder in the crystal in some directions. This is a plot of intensity versus resolution
for an ideal crystal with randomly-placed atoms that vary an rms of about 0.5 Angstrom
from one unit cell to another. The intensities of diffraction spots for this
crystal are high at low resolution, near the center of this diffraction pattern, and weaker
at higher resolution, further from the center in the diffraction pattern. This fall-off is described by a B-factor or
atomic displacement parameter (ADP)which is 18 angstroms squared in this case. If the variation from unit cell to unit cell
is larger, the B-factor is larger and the fall-off is faster. If you plot the log of the mean intensity
versus you get a straight line. These are Wilson plots and the slopes are
proportional to the B-factor. Let's look at the Xtriage analysis of mean
intensity versus resolution. Xtriage shows a plot that is similar to a
Wilson plot. It displays mean intensity versus resolution,
after applying some resolution-dependent scale factors. This is a pretty ordinary plot of mean intensity
versus resolution for a real high-resolution dataset called P9 that diffracts to better
than 1.7 angstroms. Focus on the orange "via binning" curve. Notice that the intensities generally decrease
with resolution, but there is a huge peak at about 4-5 angstroms. This peak is present because the locations
of atoms in this crystal are not random at all. The peak at 4-5 angstroms corresponds to the
typical non-bonded atom-atom distance. Note that the orange curve matches the expected
curve in green rather closely. Xtriage analyzes our data to identify the
effective B-factor describing how much weaker the data are at higher resolution. Here is the Xtriage analysis of this same
P9 dataset. The estimated Wilson B-factor is 18 angstroms
squared. This corresponds to a mean square variation
in atomic positions from unit cell to unit cell of about 0.5 Angstroms, which is rather
low. As we saw, this crystal diffracted to high
resolution. The Xtriage output also analyzes the fall-off
with resolution along the principal directions of the diffraction pattern. In this case along a-star and b-star the effective
B-value is 16 angstroms-squared, while along c-star it is 26 angstroms-squared. If the crystal were highly anisotropic these
numbers might differ by as much as a hundred angstroms-squared or more. Now we are going to look at a dataset from
a crystal at lower resolution. As there is no high-resolution data, the shape
of the curve looks like just part of the curve for the P9 dataset we saw before. Notice that in this sec17 dataset from the
Advanced Xtriage tutorial, the intensity versus resolution plot has a big bump at about 3.6
A that does not match the expected plot. Reflections in this resolution range can sometimes
be much too strong because they accidentally include diffraction from ice that was on your
crystal. In a case like this you will want to reprocess
your data, excluding diffraction spots that overlap with ice rings. Now let's have a look at your space group. Often you will not know the true space group
of your crystal until you have solved the structure. During data processing, you used the crystal
lattice, the symmetry of the diffraction pattern, and systematic absences to choose a possible
space group and index your data. If you merge your data with a particular crystal
symmetry, then you force the data to have that symmetry. It is best to supply Xtriage with unmerged
data. Xtriage will not detect symmetry that is too
high. If you find that your crystal may be twinned,
you should re-run Xtriage with unmerged data and specifying the lowest symmetry space group
where you have nearly complete data. Xtriage can tell you whether the symmetry
you chose is too low. It can also tell you if there are systematic
absences in the data that you supply. Here is the twinned porin data we saw in the
twinning tutorial, analyzed for space group symmetry specifying the correct space group
of R3. The minimum R unused is the R-value for comparing
reflections related by a symmetry element that is not used in this space group. Xtriage says that for space group R3 the minimum
R-unused is 0.195. This is pretty low. It says there is symmetry present that is
not part of R3, but not perfect symmetry (which would have an R nearer to zero). If we examine the data indexed in space group
R32, with an extra 2-fold axis, the minimum R unused is now 0.41, so there is no longer
extra symmetry. Now the minimum R used, the R for symmetry
elements included in the space group, is 0.195. This is a bit high. For typical data, a symmetry R value should
be closer to 10% or less. Xtriage automatically tries to assign the
space group using the Bayesian Information criterion which balances the number of symmetry
elements with how well the data merges in that space group. A low BIC value is good, and Xtriage says
that R3 with a BIC of 1.1 times ten to the fifth is more likely than R32, with a BIC
of 2.8 times ten to the fifth. If you are not positive about the space group,
you will want to try various possibilities as you try to solve your structure. 

