Advanced Tutorial phenix.xtriage - Checking for twinning

Today we are going to learn about twinning
using Xtriage In this tutorial we are thinking of solving
a challenging structure as a treasure hunt. The treasures are the problems. Once you've found them all and fixed them
or accounted for them, you get to solve your structure. In the first Advanced Xtriage tutorial we
covered translational NCS. You might want to watch that tutorial before
this one. Today's treasure is going to be: Twinning In a later tutorial we will cover Ice rings
and the Wrong space group. We will illustrate each situation with an
Xtriage analysis of datasets from the Phenix tutorial called "Advanced Xtriage" Merohedral twinning is quite common and occurs
when your crystal is composed of identical but rotated crystals sandwiched together with
their lattices matching. In this case, the h,k,l reflection from one
crystal superimposes exactly on the twin-related reflection from the other crystal and we measure
the weighted average. The weights for the two are the volumes of
the two crystals. The possible twin relationships for your crystal
depend on the crystal symmetry and cell dimensions. For a twinned crystal, as each reflection
is mixed with a twin-related reflection, the intensities tend all to be more average than
for a normal crystal and the intensity and amplitude distributions are narrowed. Note that translational NCS can mask the effects
of twinning, and if both are present the intensity and amplitude distributions can look almost
normal. That's why we first check for tNCS and use
a different test for twinning if it is present. The amplitude distribution for twinned porin
data is narrow compared with an untwinned crystal. When you run Xtriage on the twinned porin
data available in the Advanced Xtriage tutorial it will show you this traffic light summary. Notice the big red light letting you know
that there may be twinning. You can click on this button and you will
get the "twinning and intensity statistics summary" that we will see shortly. For now we will use the pull-down menu labelled
Xtriage summary to go to "diagnostic tests for twinning and pseudosymmetry". Here is the Xtriage analysis of this twinned
porin data. The highest Patterson peak is just 6% of the
origin, so no translational NCS is present. The Wilson ratio is 1.67, just a little higher
than the 1.5 of a perfect twin. The "Twinning and intensity statistics summary"
in Xtriage tells us the twin law in this case is h,-h-k,-l, based on the lowest R-value
between twin-related reflections, or Robs, of 0.195. The twin fraction alpha estimated using the
Britton analysis which we will see in detail in a moment is 0.29. Let's look at Xtriage plots for the twin law
h,-h-k,-l. If you have twinned data and you know the
twin fraction alpha, you can detwin the data and estimate true intensities using the observed
intensities for pairs of twin-related reflections. The Britton analysis counts the number of
negative intensities obtained when the data are detwinned using each possible twinning
fraction. Notice that many negative reflections are
obtained if the data are detwinned using twin fractions bigger than 0.29. We can conclude that these diffraction data
are from a twinned crystal with one domain comprising about 29% of the volume and another
domain about 71%. This crystal is called "29% twinned" Here is the Xtriage cumulative intensity plot
for this twinned porin data. For acentric reflections in the porin dataset
there are fewer weak reflections than for acentric reflections in an ideal untwinned
dataset. The plot for acentric reflections in the porin
dataset goes up more slowly than for the ideal dataset. Here are some things to keep in mind if your
data are twinned. Your dataset has lost information. If your data are 50% twinned, each reflection
is averaged with the twin-related reflection and you have only half as much information
as an untwinned dataset at the same resolution. Your maps are going to have model bias that
is worse than usual. It may be difficult to solve your structure
by experimental phasing. Twinning may make it appear as if your crystal
has symmetry that is not really present. 

