Automated model building with Phenix AutoBuild

Today we are going to carry out automated
model-building using AutoBuild. Iterative model-building is a way to simultaneously
improve the quality of your electron density map and to build a model. In a diffraction experiment, the phase information
is lost. We need both intensities and phases to calculate
a map. If we have a starting map and can build and
refine a model based on it, we can improve the phases using our model in density modification. This improves the map even in places we didn't
build a model. Here is how AutoBuild is going to build a
model for us. We start with phase information from a model
or experimental phases. AutoBuild will carry out cycles of density
modification, model-building, and refinement to yield a new model and an improved map. If high-resolution data is available, the
phase information will be extended to high resolution. If we start with experimental phase information,
AutoBuild will carry out specialized density modification and model-building based on finding
local patterns of density. This step is called "iterative building". Rebuilding starting with a model is called
"iterative rebuilding" In case we are starting with a model, we have
two main choices of how to use this model Standard rebuilding adds and deletes residues
as necessary. Alternatively we can just move the residues
in this model around. This is called "rebuild_in_place" because
the model is rebuilt where it is, with no changes in connectivity. You can think of it as extensive refinement. Let's carry out automatic model-building starting
from measured intensities and low- resolution experimental phases such as you might get
from autosol, and a high-resolution data file for phase extension and refinement. Let's use demo data from the phenix tutorials. In the main Phenix GUI, click on "new project,"
then "set up tutorial data" and choose the first tutorial under "model-building". Select a suitable location to put this folder
and click ok. In the main Phenix GUI under the "model-building"
tab select "AutoBuild". Let's put in a title
Let's select some data. Click "Add file" to see the copied tutorial
folder: seq.dat is our sequence file
p9_data_and_phases.mtz contains low-resolution measured data and experimental phases,
p9_hires.mtz has high-resolution data click open to load the files Now let's tell the GUI what these files contain. The GUI guessed the seq.dat is a sequence
file Select the p9_data_and_phases.mtz data file. The GUI incorrectly guessed it is an initial
map. Click on modify file data type to fix this. Turn on "experimental data" to indicate that
experimental phases are present in this file turn off "initial map"
Now the GUI knows that this file contains experimental phase information. Tell the GUI that p9_hires.mtz contains high
resolution information. Click on the "Other options" tab. We are going to set a few parameters
Make sure the space group and unit cell are what we expect. Set the number of processors Now, just to run quickly:
Select "quick mode" Set the maximum iterative build and iterative
rebuild steps to 1 Set build outside model to False. This turns off a step where density is removed
wherever there is already model built. And set refine during building to False Let's leave place waters in refinement as
True. These waters are both true waters and placeholders
for "something is present here" that assist in refinement and model-building. We will also leave "rebuild-in-place" set
to "Auto". If we had supplied a model then we could set
rebuild-in-place to True if we wanted to keep the connectivity, or False if we wanted to
rebuild it completely. We're ready to go. Click on "run" and then "run now" to start
the run. Once you hit run a new AutoBuild_run tab appears,
and additional sub-tabs will appear as the run proceeds. The summary tab shows the files produced and
the overall statistics for the run. This model was built with 2.5-angstrom data. Notice the freeR value, the number of residues
built, and the number of fragments making up the model. At this resolution a freeR in the 20's or
low 30s and most of the model built in fragments that
are about 50 residues or more in length is just
fine. In the AutoBuild GUI, the models tab shows
a summary of models built during the run. The structure status tab shows secondary structure
in your model The summary tab has an "open in coot" button
that will load the final model and map. This is a fine model and map for 3 Angstrom
data. The next step after running AutoBuild is to
run phenix refine and to use the Coot interface to phenix.refine to fix up problem areas in
your model. Then you can carry out more cycles of
AutoBuilding and manual improvement until you have a complete model. You might then run ligand fitting to place
any ligands in your model, followed by final refinement. 

