Automatic map interpretation with map_to_model

Today we are going to learn about automatic
map interpretation using map_to_model in the Phenix GUI. The purpose of Phenix map_to_model is to take
a 3-dimensional map like this one and interpret it to produce an atomic model. Let's see how map-to-model works. First the input map is optimized for clarity. This is done using the phenix autosharpen
tool. Next the unique part of the map is identified
to avoid duplication of effort. Then models are built into the unique part
of the map using several independent methods. Finally the best parts of all the models are
assembled into a final model. Here the green is the known structure of a
ribosome and the brown is the structure built by map-to-model. Note that map-to-model produces a preliminary
model, not a fully complete one. The key input for map interpretation is the
map file. It can be in any standard format such as mrc,
or ccp4 map or mtz format. The map can come from cryo-EM or from crystallography. It is not necessary to sharpen the map beforehand
as this will be done by map-to-model. The high-resolution limit of the map will
also be needed. The resolution limit is used to reduce the
contribution of high-resolution noise to the map. For a cryo-EM map you can use the resolution
limit you have identified using half-dataset Fourier Shell Correlations. For an X-ray map you can use the resolution
of your data. A sequence file is also needed. This tells map-to-model what is in the map
and whether it is protein, rna or dna or a combination of these. If symmetry has been applied during reconstruction
of the map, a symmetry file is helpful. You can also specify the symmetry type such
as D7 or I. Now let's automatically interpret a map for
part of a rotavirus structure from the phenix tutorials. Here is the map that we are going to interpret. It is a pretty clear map, but as we will see,
it needs sharpening. In the main phenix GUI, click on "new project"
and then "set up tutorial data". In the pull-down menu under "cryoEM" select
the "model-building tutorial". Choose a suitable place to put the files and
hit OK Now there will be a new rotavirus project
listed for you. It contains a small part of a rotavirus map
cut out with the Phenix map-box tool. We are going to build into this small map. Let's run map-to-model. Under "model-building" select "map-to-model". let's enter a title. Let's find the map file in the tutorial directory. pick "rotavirus_short_box.ccp4". If there were reconstruction symmetry used,
we could enter it here under NCS file (NCS is the term in crystallography corresponding
to reconstruction symmetry). We need a sequence file. Let's get it from the tutorial directory. Let's set the resolution to 2.6 A and the
number of processors to 4 We're ready to go. Hit Run and as map-to-model starts, a new
map-to-model run will appear. The Run status tab will show the log file. Map-to-model can take a while to run...for
a ribosome it can be many days unless you use many processors. This tutorial data takes about an hour to
run. The first big thing that map-to-model does
is automatically sharpen the map. Here it is identifying the optimal sharpening
by maximizing the clarity and connectivity of the map, combined to yield adjusted surface
area or SA. The optimal sharpening is a B-sharpen of 35
Angstroms squared, leading to a maximal SA of 4. Here's the original map we saw before and
the sharpened map which looks much clearer. Next map-to-model chooses the region to build
in, builds several models, puts everything together, refines it, and writes out map_to_model.pdb. Here is the end of the log file. Map to model has built 152 residues in 13
chains. The map-model correlation is 0.78 which is
very good, and the final model has been copied to map_to_model.pdb. Let's click on "open in coot" and we can see
the sharpened map and the model that has been built. This is the kind of result that you would
expect for a high-resolution map. At lower resolution the model will be less
complete and the sequence may not be matched to the model. The next step will be manual model-building
to fill out the model and refinement to optimize the model. 

