Automated map sharpening with phenix.autosharpen

Today we are going to learn about automatic
map sharpening using auto sharpen in the Phenix GUI. Have a look at this cryo-EM map. We are going to blur and sharpen this map
by adjusting the resolution-dependent weighting of the map. As the map is sharpened the clarity initially
improves but eventually it becomes worse as the connectivity is lost. The numbers in the upper right corner indicate
the final B-iso of the map, a measure of its sharpness where lower means sharper. Notice that the map is most interpretable
when the B-iso value is about 20 in this case Phenix autosharpen is going to automatically
choose the sharpening of the map that leads to the highest level of detail while maintaining
the connectivity of the map. This combination is called "adjusted surface
area" because the clarity is highest when the surface area of the contours in the map
is highest. In most cases maximizing adjusted surface
area leads to an optimally sharpened map. The required inputs for map sharpening are
a map file and the high-resolution limit of the map. The map file can be any standard format such
as an mrc map or a ccp4-style map or MTZ file. The map can come from cryo-EM or from X-ray
crystallography. The resolution limit is used to reduce the
contribution of high-resolution noise to the map. For a cryo-EM map you can use the resolution
limit you have identified using half-dataset Fourier Shell Correlations. For an X-ray map you can use the resolution
of your data. Here is the oversharpened rotavirus map that
we would like to auto-sharpen. Let's open the Phenix GUI and optimize the
sharpening of this map. In the main Phenix GUI, click "new project"
and then "set up tutorial data". Then under "please select a dataset" go down
to the Cryo-EM datasets and pick the "autosharpen map" tutorial. Choose a suitable place to put this data and
hit OK Now there will be a new rotavirus auto sharpening
project ready for you to use. To run auto sharpen, click on Maps and then
scroll down and click on "Autosharpen map" This will set up a new autosharpen run. Let's put in a title We can choose our map file by clicking on
browse which will take us to the directory where we copied the tutorial data. Select "rotavirus over sharpened map and click
Open to load the file. Let's set the resolution to 2.6 A. Now we're ready to go. Hit Run and the autosharpen GUI will try to
automatically figure out the optimal sharpening of this map. As the run starts, a new autosharpen tab will
appear and the log file is displayed in the Run Status window. Here the log file is telling us about the
map we supplied. Notice the grid and unit cell and make sure
these agree with what you expect. Also notice the origin and extent of the map. The origin of cryo-EM maps is not necessarily
at (0,0,0) and often is instead at the center of the map. Auto-sharpen will write out the sharpened
map with the same origin as the input map. Here autosharpen is identifying the value
of the final sharpening parameter B-iso that maximizes the adjusted surface area (SA),
which is the combination of map clarity and connectivity. The best value of B-iso is 100, with an adjusted
surface area value of 3.9 This corresponds to a sharpening B applied
of minus 86, that is, the map is blurred compared to the starting map. At the end of the run, a summary is presented. It lists the final sharpening B applied of
-86. It lists the file containing the sharpened
map as well. If we click on the "Open in coot" button,
the sharpened map is displayed. The sharpened map is quite nice. It looks very little like the original over-sharpened
map. However note that these two maps have exactly
the same information in them. It is just that the weighting of Fourier terms
at high resolution is different in the two maps. The over sharpened map has large Fourier coefficients
at high resolution and the optimally sharpened map has lower values. In this case it was necessary to blur the
map to optimize it. In other cases it is necessary to sharpen
it. Auto-sharpen can also be used to optimally
sharpen a map to best fit a model. This can sometimes give just a little bit
better sharpening the without a model, but it also has just a little bit of bias towards
the model. In the autosharpen window you just enter the
model. You can also use autosharpen to sharpen locally,
with a different value in different parts of the map. To do this, go to all parameters in the autosharpen
window, then click on map modification, and turn on local sharpening. 

