Basic Phenix eLBOW tutorial

eLBOW is a tool for generating chemical restraints. It is a flexible and powerful tool that has
many features. Its main purpose is to generate restraints
for ligands and other non-standard chemical entities in a macromolecular model. The Phenix GUI has two eLBOW GUIs, both in
the ligands button of the main program menu. One is for the advanced user but this tutorial
is going to introduce the simplified wizard eLBOW GUI. Upon choosing the simple eLBOW GUI, the first
panel displays some choices for the molecular input of the ligand. Some are preferred because these formats generally
provide unambiguous descriptions of the molecule topology. They include SMILES, Mol3D or SDF and the
data from the Chemical Components library available from the PDB and distributed with
Phenix. This is a database of CIF files that contains
the chemical information of ALL the chemical entities in the Protein Data Bank. The formats at the bottom are not recommended
because heuristics need to applied to determine the molecular topology and there is room for
error. It is always better to know enough about your
ligand to use one of the preferred input rather than using a PDB input without CONECT records
or hydrogens. Let's choose the Chemical Components input
for this introduction. The next screen displays the options regarding
the Cartesian geometry of the molecule. The simple option uses bond lengths calculated
using quantum chemistry for ideal distances. The second option is a built-in RM1/AM1 semi-empirical
QM method that is appropriate for most drug-like molecules. The next method uses a feature in eLBOW that
can use 3rd party QM packages such as GAMESS to generate higher-level QM geometries. This requires additional setup. The final radio button option is to provide
a Cartesian geometry from another file such as a PDB file. This last option at the bottom is related
to the atom names. This allows a molecule to have the atom names
from another molecule of similar topology. This is helpful when working on a series of
similar molecules. Let's choice the AM1 option and OK. The final configuration screen has only those
fields and buttons needed as well as a few minor configuration options that are always
shown. This button allows for searching of the chemical
components library. Searching for water shows the water molecule
as well as other water containing entities. We only need to enter a residue code to generate
restraints so let's enter our toy example, HOH, which is the most common code for water. Clicking on run will run eLBOW which is very
quick for water. The log file is displayed in this field and
the output files in the results tab. A successful job will result in a PDB file
and a restraints file in CIF format. Either file can be useful in fitting the ligand
in a model. Choosing the restraints file and then the
REEL button will allow you to validate and edit the restraints but that is for another
tutorial. Thank you for listening.

