Calculating polder maps

Hi everybody, This tutorial is about running phenix.polder
via the graphical user interface. A polder map is an OMIT map which excludes
bulk solvent around the OMIT region. This way, weak densities may become visible,
which can be otherwise obscured by bulk solvent. Only two input files are required: a model
file and a reflection file. Furthermore, the atoms to be omitted have
to be defined. Here is an example where polder maps can be
useful: The electron density map in green shows an
OMIT map of a MES molecule in structure 1ABA. The map is contoured at 3 sigma. At this level, only a few electron density
peaks around the heavier atoms are visible and several carbon atoms do not have electron
density. The Omit map seems therefore not very convincing
for placing the MES molecule. However, the unclear density might be due
to the bulk solvent mask, which is shown here as a violet mesh. In the OMIT map, the bulk solvent occupies
the area of the MES molecule and can therefore obscure its density. Polder maps exclude the bulk solvent mask
in the OMIT region and might help visualizing weak densities. In this tutorial, I will show how to calculate
a polder OMIT map for the MES molecule. To do this, open the Phenix GUI. In the panel on the right hand side, choose
Maps. Scroll down to the last option, which is 'Polder
maps'. Click, and a new window opens. Here we choose the input parameters. For book-keeping, start with choosing a job
title, such as 'phenix_tutorial'. To compute a polder map, we need two input
files: a model file and a reflection file. Click on 'Browse', and choose your model file
in the pop up window. Then do the same for the reflection file. If there are several data labels in the reflection
file, it might be necessary to choose the appropriate ones. In this example, there is only one possible
label for map calculations. An important input is the omit selection. This defines the region for which the polder
map is calculated. The MES molecule, for which we want to calculate
a polder map, is in chain A and has residue number 88. In the Phenix selection syntax, this corresponds
to the following string, which needs to be typed in the box next to omit selection
'chain A and resseq 88' (resseq stands for residue). The resolution limits can be changed in these
boxes. By default, phenix.polder will use all available
data from the reflection file. Below are some optional parameters, it is
recommended to keep the default values. An exception is maybe the output prefix. It will add a string to the output filename,
which is convenient for bookkeeping. Now we have all necessary input for running
phenix polder. Click run to start the program. The calculation should be rather quick, for
a small protein like in this example, it should take just a few seconds. Lets first have a look at the output log file
by going to 'run status'. In the top part of the log file is a summary
of the input parameters, followed by a summary of the omitted atoms. It is recommended to have a quick look at
the summary to check if the selection is correct. Remember, we wanted to calculate a polder
map for the MES molecule with residue number 88 in chain A. As you can see, the selection
was done correctly. Below that is a list of crystallographic R
factors - for the unmodified input model and data,
- the polder map and - for the conventional omit map. The values should be fairly similar. Towards the end, there is a list of map correlation
coefficients. These help to judge if the density in the
polder omit map resembles to a modeled feature or to bulk solvent. I recommend looking at CC13 - that's this
value here. It should be larger than CC12 and CC23. In our example it is 0.79 versus 0.59 and
0.48, the density in the polder map therefore represents most likely the MES molecule. It is out of scope of this tutorial to explain
how the correlation coefficients are calculated, but if you want to know more about them please
read the paper about polder maps. If Coot is available on your system, the polder
map can be opened from the Phenix gui by going to the results tab. Click on the mtz file and then click open
in coot. Lets center on the MES molecule. By default, Coot will load two maps. The first is the polder map, the second is
the conventional OMIT map. Here is the polder map, it shows electron
density for almost every atom of the MES molecule. So it is very convincing that this molecule
is present in the structure. Let's compare this to the conventional OMIT
map which we saw in the beginning. Here we have only a few electron density peaks
covering some atoms of the MES molecule. So this shows the usefulness of the polder
map compared to the conventional OMIT map.

