Changing custom parameters in phenix.refine

Hi Everybody, This tutorial is about changing custom parameters
in phenix.refine. Phenix.refine has now more than 800 parameters. Those which are often used, are available
as buttons or input fields in the graphical user interface, but obviously, it is not possible
to squeeze all of them into the GUI window. Some of the parameters are therefore available
by other means. I will now explain how to change a specific
parameter via the GUI. First of all, here is where you can find the
summary of the phenix.refine parameters. Open the Phenix homepage at phenix-online.org. On the right hand side, click onto 'documentation'. Then click on 'Complete Phenix reference documentation'
from the list on top. The page which just opened contains links
to the documentation pages of all Phenix tools. Scroll down to 'Structure refinement and restraint
generation', and click on the first link in the list. This opens the documentation for phenix.refine. Scroll down the table of contents, to find
a link for the 'list of available parameters' at the end. Click, to jump to the list of parameters. The parameter is written in black, the default
value in red, and the description of the parameter is in blue. As an example, I want to change the parameter,
which prevents that two neighboring cysteine sulfur atoms are interpreted as a disulfide
bond. This parameter might be of use in the case
of radiation-damaged structures, where disulfide bonds may break under the influence of X-rays. For example, in chicken egg white lysozyme,
the disulfide bond between Cys 30 and Cys 115 shows indications for cleavage after being
irradiated by about 1 MGy. Let's go back to the documentation and look
for the name of the parameter. It is found under pdb_interpretation and is
called 'disulfide_bond_exclusions_selection_string'. So where to find it in the graphical user
interface of phenix.refine? Let's switch to the Phenix GUI'
In the right panel, open the phenix.refine window. Usually, the necessary files for refinement
should be input first, but let's skip this step for our example. Under 'configure', go the the 'refinement
settings' tab. In the 'other options' field at the bottom,
click on 'all parameters'. In the drop down menu, choose 'Search Parameters'
which is on the bottom of the list. Then type in the name of the parameter. You can type in either the complete name or
only part of it, it should not matter if capital or lowercase letters are used. Click OK and all parameters matching the search
string appear, in this case three parameters are listed . Here is the parameter which we
want to change in our example: disulfide_bond_exclusions_selection_string. In the input field next to it, the default
value can be changed. For the disulfide bond in the lysozyme model,
the selection string is 'chain A and resseq 30 and name SG'. The sulfur atom in Cysteine 30 will therefore
not be considered as part of a disulfide bond. Then click OK to save the changes. If you want to check if the parameter was
changed, click on 'all parameters' and choose 'view all settings' in the drop down menu. Our keyword is found under pdb_interpretation. The default value was indeed changed to the
selection string I typed previously.

