Checking data quality with phenix.xtriage

Today we are going to learn about checking
data quality with xtriage Xtriage will tell us if our data are going
to be useful and if they have any unusual characteristics In particular, Xtriage will tell us how accurate
the data are. If we supply unmerged anomalous data, Xtriage
will tell us in detail whether there is an anomalous signal It will also tell us about ice rings, whether
translational non-crystallographic symmetry, NCS, is present, and whether twinning is present Twinning tests depend on whether translational
NCS is present. If translational NCS is not present, we use
the Wilson ratio, the ratio of the mean square intensity to the mean intensity, squared to
check for twinning. If a crystal is untwinned, the Wilson ratio
for acentric reflections is two, and if the crystal is perfectly twinned, the Wilson ratio
is 1.5. If translational NCS is present, a separate
test called the L-test which is corrected for effects of translational NCS is used Xtriage can also help you check if your data
are indexed correctly. Note that twinning can introduce false symmetry
into the intensities. Xtriage can also check whether the systematic
absences in your data match the space group you specified. Let's use demo data from the phenix tutorials. In the main Phenix GUI, click on "new project,"
then "set up tutorial data" and choose the Xtriage analysis of SAD data tutorial under
"other". Select a suitable location to put this folder
and click ok. In the main Phenix GUI under the "data analysis"
tab select "xtriage". Let's put in a title We can select our unmerged reflection data
by clicking on Browse, selecting the "sca" file, and clicking OK. For unmerged data in sca format, the unit
cell dimensions are not part of the data file. We can input them as 114 114 32.5 90 90 90. Check the space group as well. In this case it is I4, not I41. Let's run xtriage now by clicking on the Run
button. Xtriage will display a traffic-light summary. Green is ok, yellow is worth checking, and
red indicates a problem The traffic lights cover common situations
from the resolution of the data to intensity statistics and translational NCS to completeness
of the data. There is a pull-down menu where you can find
specific information such as twinning statistics, information about your input data, twin laws,
and possible symmetries of your crystal. Click on resolution of the data This shows us our data goes to 1.75 Angstroms,
with 145000 reflections, and redundancy of 6.7. Note the mean I over sigma of 13 which is
very high. Clicking show graphs and selecting redundancy
shows the redundancy ranging from 7 at low resolution to 6 at high resolution. Completeness is very high at all but the highest
resolution I over sigma goes from 20 to 3, fine for a
SAD dataset A CC-one-half plot is over a very good 0.97
at all resolutions... The half-dataset anomalous correlation is
over a very good value of 0.5 at most resolutions Now lets examine twinning. The green light indicates no translational
NCS. We can click and see that the largest Patterson
peak has a height of only 6.9% of the origin. 20% would mean that there is translational
NCS. As there is no translational NCS, we can look
at the Wilson statistics. For acentric reflections, the Wilson ratio
is 1.99, very close to the expectation of 2 for untwinned data. A perfectly twinned crystal would have a value
of 1.5 We can also look at a cumulative distribution
plot of intensities. The observed distribution for acentric reflections
in blue is similar to the expected distribution for untwinned crystals. We can find possible twin laws in the pull-down
menu. For this space group and cell dimensions,
there is one merohedral (M) twin relationship with a twin law of -k,-h,-l. If there were twinning you would use this
twin law in refinement. Now let's look at our anomalous data
The traffic light says the probability of finding 5 sites with this data is about 94%. This plot shows in blue the I over sigma we
saw before as a function of resolution, and in brown it shows the estimated anomalous
signal, which is 10 for an ok SAD dataset and 30 for a great one. The more data that is included, the higher
the anomalous signal, up to a resolution of about 2 A. This gives us an idea that 2 Angstrom data
is a good range to use in finding the substructure in this case. This next plot shows in brown the probability
we can find the substructure if there are 5 anomalously-scattering atoms in the asymmetric
unit. This probability comes from the anomalous
signal in the previous plot. The chance of solving this structure is very
high. We can look at a detailed table of the quality
of this anomalous dataset as well. As a function of resolution we can see the
half-dataset anomalous correlation, the estimated true anomalous correlation, the anomalous
signal and its uncertainty, the probability of solving the substructure, and the expected
figure of merit of phasing after solving the structure. Keep in mind that the purpose of xtriage is
to find possible problems and to see how useful your data are. If you find problems, then you will want to
go back to data processing, fix the problems and then run xtriage again. 

