Density modification for cryo-EM maps

Today we are going to learn about density
modification of cryo-EM maps using ResolveCryoEM in the Phenix GUI. Density modification uses expectations about
one part of a map to improve another part of the map. The original map on the left is implausible. It has a noisy solvent and its density profile
is unlike that of typical protein because it contains noise. The density-modified map on the right is more
plausible with flat solvent and density histograms similar those of typical proteins Let's density modify a cryo EM map now. We are going to use the 1.8 Angstrom map of
human apoferritin from the Phenix density modification tutorial. In the main Phenix GUI, select "New Project"
Then click on "Set up tutorial data" and select a dataset. Scroll down to the Cryo-EM section and select
Human apoferritin density modification at 1.8 A.
Then click OK There will now be a new apoferritin project
with tutorial data in a new directory. We can click on it to select it. Let's run density modification now. Click on Cryo-EM to show the cryo-EM tools. Scroll down and hit the ResolveCryoEM button
to load the cryo EM density modification tool. We are going to run starting with two half
maps. These should be unmasked and as unprocessed
as possible. Let's put in a title. Let's put in the two half maps. They are in the directory that was created
when we set up the tutorial. The half maps are already cut out from the
original maps and are called half_map_1 and 2 boxed dot ccp4. The resolution of our map is about 2 Angstroms. The best value of the resolution for density
modification is usually a little smaller than the map resolution. We could leave it blank, but let's specify
it as 1.8 Angstroms. Now let's add a sequence file. This tells ResolveCryoEM about the size of
our molecule. Let's uncheck the "Box before analysis" box
because our map is already boxed. Let's use all 4 of our processors And let's density modify unsharpened maps. This sometimes helps for high-resolution maps. The alternative is to use maps with half-map
sharpening applied. We're ready to go. Hit *Run to start density modification. After about 15 minutes we get a new Results
tab that shows us the resolution used in density modification, the starting resolution, the
final resolution, and the estimated improvement. The next tab shows the Fourier shell correlation
of the starting half-maps. Notice that the correlation is very high until
the resolution gets *close to 1.9 Angstroms. The final tab shows the estimated map quality
of original and density modified maps as a function of resolution. The light brown curve shows that the original
map is about 50% correlated with the true (but unknown) map at a resolution of 1.9 Angstroms. The blue curve shows that the density modified
map crosses that threshold at slightly finer resolution. Notice that the blue curve is higher than
the brown one at all resolutions between 1.9 and 2.5 Angstroms. That means that the density modified map is
better in this resolution range. Let's look at our original and density modified
maps. In the files tab, select open in Coot. That opens our map. Let's load in a model from an x-ray structure
refined against the original map. This model is supplied with the tutorial and
is called apoferritin_chain_A_rsr.pdb. And let's load in that original map that comes
with the tutorial. Here is the original map in yellow...and here
is the density modified map in the same region. The model based on the x-ray structure has
two conformations for the phenylalanine. There is just one in this cryo-EM structure
and it is seen very clearly in the density-modified map. The density modified map is generally more
clear than the original map, but the low-resolution aspects of the two maps are very similar because
the original map already had very good low-resolution information. 

