Explaining the atom selection syntax

Hi everybody, this tutorial is about the Phenix
atom selection syntax. Many of the programs in Phenix allow specifying
selections of atoms in a model. Common examples include:
TLS and rigid-body refinement groups Atoms to leave out for omit map calculation
Selections for isotropic vs. anisotropic B-factor refinement
and Modifying properties for subsets of atoms The selection is expressed as a string, which
is a sequence of characters or words, and is defined using a common syntax. The selection syntax uses atomic properties
such as atom name, residue number, chain ID, the B-factor and many more. Here are some examples illustrating the selection
syntax: To select all atoms, use "all"
To select all C alpha atoms, use "name ca" (ca stands for CA)
As you can see, the string for atom name is not case sensitive. To select chain B, use "chain B". The chain ID is case sensitive if there are
both chain IDs lowercase b and uppercase B in the model. To select a single residue by number, such
as residue number 42, use "resseq 42" To select a range of residues, such as the
residues from number 2 to 10, use "resseq 2 : 10" (2 and 10 are included in the selection) The examples we looked at previously are quite
intuitive. But let's have a closer look at one of the
examples. To select the residue by its number, we used
"resseq 42". This selection can be ambiguous. Imagine the case where there are several chains
in the model, f.ex. chain A and B. The selection "resseq 42" will
select residue 42 from chain A and from chain B. If you want to select residue 42 from chain
B only, both properties have to be combined. In general, selections can be combined by
using the Boolean operators AND
OR NOT
In our example, the syntax to select residue 42 in chain B is "chain B and resseq 42". Here are some examples of combined expressions
using Boolean operators: To select all alanine residues in chain A,
use "chain a and resname ALA" To select alternative conformation B of residue
74 in chain A, use "chain a and resseq 74 and altloc B"
To select all atoms except hydrogen atoms, use "not element H"
To select chain A and B, use "chain A or chain B" The last example showed that a Boolean expression
can be different compared to natural language. To say that we select both chain A and chain
B, we use the word "and" in natural language. However, the corresponding Boolean expression
uses the operator "or". The expression "chain A and chain B" will
yield an empty selection, because there is no atom that can satisfy these two conditions
simultaneously. Keep this in mind when combining expressions. Usually, phenix stops if the selection is
wrong. But what if the selection syntax is correct
but does not reflect what you wanted to select? Here is a way to test a selection before running
a program. In the command line, run the command 'phenix.pdb_atom_selection'
followed by the model file and the selection string between quotation marks. Here is an example:
Let's check for the selection string 'chain A and resseq 7' in model 4gs3.pdb. So write 'phenix.pdb_atom_selection 4gs3.pdb
'chain A and resseq 7'' in the command line. At the end of the standard output is a pdb
string of the selection and the total number of atoms selected, in our case 9 atoms for
residue 7. Let's try residue number 6. This yields an empty selection, because the
residue is not present in the model. This command line tool can be therefore used
to quickly check a selection. It is also possible to select atoms based
on their numerical properties. Here are some examples:
To select all atoms with B factors larger than 50, use:
‘bfactor > 50’ To select all atoms with occupancy smaller
than 0.5, use: ‘occupancy < 0.5’
There are also smart selections, but note that they may not be recognized by all programs:
To select all water molecules, use: ‘water’
To select the protein backbone, use: ‘backbone’
To select all residues within a sphere of radius five angstrom around residue number
20, use: within(5, resseq 20) The documentation page about the selection
syntax lists more examples of selection expression. Also, there is a newsletter article about
typical scenarios for occupancy refinement, which shows selections in the context of alternative
conformations. You can find links for both texts in the description
box of this video.

