Fitting ligands into density with phenix.ligandfit

Today we are going to learn about automated
ligand fitting using ligandfit in the Phenix GUI. The inputs to Phenix ligandfit are a flexible
ligand and a density map showing the ligand. The goal is to identify a conformation and
orientation of the ligand that fits the map. Here is how ligand fitting works
First the biggest region of high density in the map is chosen
Then the ligand you supply is analyzed to identify rotatable bonds and rigid pieces
a rigid part of the ligand is fit into density And the remainder of the ligand is traced. You can specify the ligand in any of several
ways: a PDB or CIF file with the *ligand in it
A SMILES string corresponding to the ligand Or a 3-letter code identifying the *ligand The quality of your ligand fitting will depend
a lot on the map. At very high resolution you can see every
atom. At low resolution the ligand is just placed
into a blob of density. At moderately high resolution such as 2 angstroms
you can see the conformation fairly clearly. We are going to use Phenix tutorial data on
the nsf-d2 protein which we know has ATP bound. Here is the difference density map that shows
the ATP. Here is the ATP molecule that we would like
to fit into this density. Notice that it is not clear just how to change
the conformation of the ATP and put it into the density. The advantage of ligandfit is that this can
be done for you automatically. Let's go to the Phenix GUI and set up the
ligand fitting tutorial data. Click on New project and then "set up tutorial
data. Then select the ligand fitting tutorial
under LIGANDS Choose a suitable destination and click OK
to copy the tutorial data to your directory. Now there will be a new nsf-d2-ligand project
ready to use. In the main Phenix GUI select *ligands and
then ligandfit. This will open a new LigandFit window. Let's put in a title Now let's select our data. Click Add File and you will see the content
of the tutorial directory. This
nsf-d2.mtz contains measured data for this protein-ATP complex
nsf-d2-noligand.pdb is just the protein atp.pdb is just the ligand, in an arbitrary
configuration Select all three and click Open and the three
files will be imported into the LigandFit GUI. The GUI has guessed the data type for each
file. If you want to change it, select the file
and "modify data type" and choose the appropriate data type. Notice the space group and unit cell and make
sure that they are what you expect. Choose the ligand map type. Your choices are Fo-Fc, which is an Fobs minus
Fcalc map phased with the model, Fobs, which is a Fobs map also phased with
the model , n and pre-calculated, which will use map coefficients
that you input. Set the number of processors to the number
you have on your computer We entered our ATP ligand as a PDB file, but
you could specify ATP as the ligand code and that would work as well. Now let's run by clicking Run and Run Now. Once the Gui runs a new Ligand_fit tab will
appear The Status, tab shows the log file
Parallel jobs tab shows the results for each try at fitting. Let's focus on the Summary tab which shows
the files that are produced. Notice that one final solution is listed,
with an overall CC or map correlation of 0.84, and 31 of 31 atoms in the ligand placed in
the map. A good map correlation is 0.75 or higher. Below 0.5 is often suspect. If not all the atoms in your ligand are placed
it means that there was no density for some parts of the ligand Let's select this solution and click Open
in Coot We can center on the ligand with "go to atom",
selecting the ligand_fit_1_1.pdb file, and "apply" Zooming in we see that the ligand is placed
in the density very nicely. This is the kind of result you might expect
to obtain with data that are about 2 Angstroms or so in resolution. As we saw in the introduction, at lower resolution
the density is more like a blob and is difficult to interpret precisely, while at higher resolution
even more detail than this is visible. Usually the next step after ligand fitting
will be to run refinement with the entire molecule and ligand. You can just click on the "run phenix.refine"
button and the refinement run will be set up for you. Keep in mind that it is important to visually
inspect the final refined ligand and its fit to density. 

