How to use multiple refinement strategies and apply them to selected parts of a model

Hi everyone, this tutorial explains how to
use multiple refinement strategies and apply them to selected parts of a model. Phenix has many refinement strategies, such
as: - rigid body refinement
- individual coordinates - individual isotropic or anisotropic B-factors
- grouped B-factors - TLS refinement
- occupancies and several more Most strategies can be combined with each
other and applied to any selected part of the structure. Let's consider this protein, which is composed
of 3 chains, colored in green, red and blue. Let's say we want to
- apply rigid body refinement for chain B - refine anisotropic B-factors for chain C
- refine occupancies for the ligand only - refine individual coordinates for chain
A, with the exception of some C-terminal residues shown here in red. Please note that this is not a realistic choice
of parameterization, but the example illustrates how to apply a variety of different strategies
to selected parts of the model. The first thing to do is to obtain the expressions
for these selections according to the Phenix atom selection syntax. Note that the syntax is explained in another
video, so in this example, we will simply give the result: Let's start with the easy cases:
To select chain B, the expression is "chain B". Note that the chain letter is case-sensitive. To select chain C, the expression is "chain
C" The ligand, which is a carbohydrate, is in
chain A and has residue numbers 301 and 302. The corresponding selection expression is
"chain A and resseq 301:302" We only want to refine the coordinates of
certain protein residues in chain A, so the expression is "chain A and resseq 24:220" If you are unsure about the selection expressions,
test them as described in the selection syntax tutorial. Now let's apply these selections to phenix.refine. In the main Phenix GUI, click on "Refinement"
in the right hand panel and choose phenix.refine. A new window opens, which has all controls
for running a refinement job. Add your model and data files by clicking
"Add file". Make sure that the space group, unit cell
parameters and data labels are correct. Don't forget to add a title for the run. To choose the strategy, go to the tab "Refinement
settings". In the strategy field, the following options
are enabled by default. Coordinates in reciprocal space and in real
space, individual B-factors and occupancies. Disable the "XYZ (real-space)" option as it
is not part of our strategy. Then click on "Select atoms", and a new window
appears. Go to the tab "Refinement strategy". The first tab on the left is for individual
coordinates. Remember, we want to refine the coordinates
for a specific residue range in chain A. Click "Add selection" and three dashes appear in
the selection field. Click once on the dashes to highlight them
and click a second time to modify the text. Type in "chain A and resseq 24:220". Then click on the occupancies tab. We want to refine the occupancies of the ligand
only, so add a new selection and let's type the selection expression: "chain A and resseq
301:302" To define the selection for B-factors, click
on the individual ADP tab. In the input field for anisotropic atoms,
type "chain C". Leave the input field for isotropic B-factors
empty. This way, default behavior is enabled for
B-factor refinement of atoms which are not in chain C.
Finally, we want to define the selection for rigid body refinement. As you can see, there is no tab for this strategy
in the selection window yet. So go back to the phenix.refine window and
enable the "rigid body" option. The tab immediately appears in the selection
window. Let's go there, add a new selection and type
"chain B". Now we are done selecting, so click "Save
and close". In the phenix.refine window, click "run",
and then "run now" to start the refinement. Again, this toy example would not make much
sense in the real world, f.ex. one would typically not apply rigid body and anisotropic B-factor
refinement in one run. A more realistic case would be to choose different
B-factor refinement strategies for different parts of a model. If the resolution of the diffraction data
is sufficiently high, one could for example chose isotropic B-factors for water molecules
and anisotropic B-factors for protein atoms. This is how to set this scenario up: Go to
the "Individual ADP" tab of the Selection editor. You can either specify appropriate selections
in the input fields, or you can go to the "Common configurations" drop down menu. Choose "All atoms except water anisotropic"
and click "Apply" and the corresponding expressions appear in the input fields.

