How to run Structure Comparison

Hi everyone, this tutorial is about the program
"Structure Comparison". "Structure Comparison" is a tool for the analysis
of near-identical protein structures, such as models from different crystal forms, various
mutants, or NCS-related copies. It displays validation outliers and regions
of difference in tables. The GUI is linked to Coot and PyMOL for easy
visualization. To run "Structure Comparison", at least two
or more related protein chains are required. It is possible to use separate files or NCS-related
copies in a single file. Optionally, diffraction data or pre-calculated
map-coefficients can be provided, so that maps can be shown in addition to the protein
chains. The data for this tutorial are available from
the example datasets which come with the Phenix installation. To set up the example data, open the Phenix
GUI and click on 'New Project'. Then, choose "Set up tutorial data". In the new window, open the drop down menu
next to "Tutorial data". Go down to "Other" and choose the data set
in the middle, called "Protein Kinase A (Structure comparison)". Choose a directory and then click OK. To run Structure Comparison, choose "Validation"
and then click on "Structure Comparison", which opens a new window. For book-keeping, add a job title. To add files, either the "Add file", "Add
directory" or "Add directory tree" button can be used. "Add file" opens files one by one. "Add directory" opens a pair of files, such
as a model and a data file in a directory, and "Add directory tree" searches for file
pairs by walking through a directory tree. As there are many files in the tutorial directory,
let's choose "Add directory". The directory contains 6 model files, which
are now listed in the input file window, along with the corresponding data files. The sequence file, which is at the bottom
is used to define the reference chain. An important choice is whether to superpose
the structures onto the reference. If this option is enabled, all similar chains
and their density maps are superposed onto the reference. The results of the comparison are the same,
but the graphics window will show all chains superposed. Let's activate the superposition for this
example, and then click run to start the program. If diffraction data were provided, maps are
calculated, which can be time-consuming. Therefore, if files with map-coefficients
are available, it is recommended to use them instead. When the run is finished, several new tabs
appear, which summarize the results of the different analyses. Lets start with the summary tab. In the left column is a list of the chains
matching the reference, for example chain E of model 1l3r matches chains A and B of
model 1syk. The table then lists the number of atoms and
residues, the sequence identity in percent, the average isotropic B-factor and the RMSD
if superposition was enabled. Click on the "Show Coot Controls" button. In the Coot Control window, click "Load models
and maps" to open a Coot session with the superposed models and maps. We will look more closely at the structures
in a moment, but let's first continue with the result tabs. The ligand summary tab lists similar properties
for all ligands present in the chains to be compared. Note that columns are sortable, the items
in the table can be for example sorted according to the number of atoms. The next table shows the rotamer angle differences. Any set of equivalent residues with multiple
rotamer classes or outliers will be displayed. Let's have a look at residue Lys 309. The rotamer is identified as outlier, highlighted
in red, in model 3dnd. The cell for model 1l3r is grey, which means
this residue is missing or incomplete. If more than half of the side-chains for a
common residue have the same rotamer, the cell is highlighted in green, which is the
case for chains A and B of model 1syk and chain E of model 3fjq. The rotamer IDs, mttt in this example, are
taken from a study published by Lovell et. al. The reference can be found in the description
of this video. Minority conformations are highlighted in
orange, as for chains A in models 3fhi and 3dne. Note also that the rotamer ID of the latter
is written in italics, which means this is an "allowed" rotamer, which only occurs in
0.3 to 2 % of residues. The summary table below can serve as a legend
for the cell colors. For Lys309, there is one outlier, three favored
rotamers, one minority favoured and one minority allowed rotamer, and one residue has missing
atoms. Now double click on the cell marked "OUTLIER",
which will center on this residue in the COOT window. Let's focus on the rotamers of 3dnd and 3dne
and hide all other maps and models. The side-chains point to the right, partly
covered with negative difference density, while there is 2fo-fc and positive difference
density on the left. The orientation of these side-chains can be
most likely improved by trying to fit them better to the density. It can be also noted that the side-chain of
Lys309 in 3fjq also points to the left. Therefore, the rotamer table can help identifying
regions which need further attention. If you have turned on structure superpositioning,
there will be a separate PDB file for each chain, plus CCP4 map files if map coefficients
were available. The results of the other tabs are represented
similarly so let's go a bit quicker through them. The Ramachandran table shows any set of residues
with outliers or multiple Ramachandran angles. The cells contain the values of the angles. The missing atoms table displays missing atoms
or residues. The cell lists which atoms are missing. Note that the cell can be expanded to see
all the atom names. The secondary structure table shows any set
of matching residues with more than one type of secondary structure assignment, for example
a residue labeled as beta sheet in one chain and without assignment in another chain. The water results table lists water molecules
and ions which are not conserved in all chains. For example, the first column shows that there
are a Mg ion, two Mn ions and one water molecule at equivalent positions in four of the chains,
while there is no water in three of the chains. Similarly, the ligand information table shows
if there are ligands at equivalent positions. The B-factor tab shows the per-residue average
isotropic B-factor. It can be used to identify regions with higher
B-factors, which can represent larger mobility or reflect modeling errors. Result tabs only appear if there are differences
between chains. This is why the following two result tabs
do not appear for the protein kinase example: Omega angle analysis:
Omega angles are categorized as trans, cis or twisted. Any matching residues with different assignments
are displayed in the results table. Histidine protonation:
The histidine side-chain can have three different protonation states. The results table shows different protonation
states if hydrogen atoms are present in at least one of the input models.

