How to run PDB tools via the GUI

Hi everybody, This tutorial is about running phenix.pdbtools
via the graphical user interface. Phenix.pdbtools is a tool for model manipulations. It offers a large variety of options, which
can be applied to the whole model or to selected parts by using atom selections. In this tutorial, some usage examples are
presented. Note that the full list of options is listed
on the documentation page. As input, only a PDB file is required. Optionally, a ligand restraints file can be
used in addition. The data from this example are from the lysozyme
model with the Protein Data Bank ID 2vb1. The resolution of the data extends to 0.65
A Now let's switch to the program and see how
to run it. To do this, open the Phenix GUI. In the panel on the right hand side, choose
Model Tools and then click on PDB tools, which opens a new window. For book-keeping, add a job title, I will
use phenix_tutorial. To add the model file, click "Add file" and
select the input file from the dialog window. The geometry restraints file is optional and
can be de-activated by unchecking the box "Stop for unknown residues". However they are strongly recommended and
should be used if possible. 2vb1 does not contain non-standard ligands and does therefore not require a restraints file. Make sure that the output directory is set
up correctly in the output section at the bottom of the window. Then click the 'options' tab to choose the
input parameters. The top section is used to define the atom
selections by a selection string. Use 'Modify atom selection' if the modification
should be applied only to a subset of atoms. Use 'Remove atom selection', if a subset of
atoms should be removed from the input model. Use 'Keep only atom selection', if only a
subset of atoms should be kept from the input model. Important: the commands' keep' and 'remove'
cannot be used simultaneously. Scenario 1:
In this example, we prepare a file for usage with lower resolution data. To do this, we remove hydrogen atoms, alternate
conformations, water molecules, ligands, convert the B-factors to isotropic and set them to
a constant value of 30 A2. To remove hydrogen atoms, use the selection
string 'element H' in the 'remove atom selection' field. To remove alternate conformations, check the
corresponding box in the 'actions' section of the window. To remove water molecules and ligands, add
'or not protein' to the selection string in the 'remove atom selection' field. To convert B-factors to isotropic, check the
corresponding box. The B-factors in this ultra-high resolution
structure are very low, it is therefore advisable to set them with a higher value before using
this model with lower resolution data. Write 30 into the field next to 'Set isotropic
B to'. Then click run to start the program. This close up shows the changes from the initial
model to the modified model. The H atoms, water molecules and ligands are
deleted and alternate conformations are reduced to single conformations. Scenario 2:
In the second example, we change all protein residues to alanine, keep only protein residues
and delete double conformations. To keep only the protein in the model, write
the selection string 'protein' in the 'keep only atom selection' field. To remove alternate conformations, check the
corresponding box in the 'actions' section of the window. To convert all residues to alanine, check
the box 'truncate to poly-Ala'. Then click run to start the program. This close up shows the changes from the initial
model to the modified model. The non-protein atoms are deleted and alternate
conformations are reduced to single conformations. All residues are converted to alanine.

