How to run Phaser-MR

This is a Phenix tutorial in solving a structure
by molecular replacement with Phaser MR. In this example we have a crystal containing
a complex of beta-lactamase, called beta for short throughout this tutorial, and a beta-lactamase
inhibitor complex, called BLIP. The structures of beta and blip have already
been solved separately, and we want to place them as two independent search models for
molecular replacement. To run this Phaser MR, the following inputs
are needed: the data, information about what is inside the asymmetric unit, and the search
models. To set up the example data, open the Phenix
GUI and click on New Project. In the new window, click on 'Set up tutorial
data' and another window appears. Open the drop down menu next to 'Tutorial
data'. Go down to 'molecular replacement' and choose
the first dataset, called 'TEM-1 Beta-lactamase/beta-lactamase inhibitor complex'. Choose a directory where the data are to be
saved. Then click OK to save the changes. In the panel on the right hand side, choose
'Molecular Replacement' and then 'Phaser-MR (full-featured)'. First, for bookkeeping, give your job a title. I will use "Solve beta-blip complex with separate
models". Ensure that the Phaser mode is 'Automated
molecular replacement'. We now add the diffraction data file. Phenix automatically populates the Unit Cell
and the space group fields from the mtz file, and you should ensure that the correct data
columns are used. Here, we use the only set of data columns
that are available - the Fobs and Sigma columns, though if intensities are available they are
preferred. A high resolution limit can be stated for
the job overall and the refinement, but it is best to let Phaser automatically decide
upon this and for you to leave this field blank. Let's move to the Ensembles tab. The term "ensemble" is used because the model
for a component can be an ensemble of alternative models, though we will only use one model
for each component in this tutorial. We start by defining the beta-lactamase model. Give the first search model a name, here 'beta'. Click on 'Add file' to add the appropriate
model. The estimated error, referred to as the 'Variance',
now needs to be changed - usually you specify the % sequence identity, but you can also
give the RMSD in Angstrom. Here we set the identity to 100% and click
OK. A second search model is now added. Click the 'Add PDB ensemble' button, and then
click on Ensemble 2. We name this one 'BLIP' and this time we add
the blip.pdb. Again the sequence identity is 100%. The third configuration tab, "ASU contents",
is where we tell Phaser what scattering matter to expect in the crystal. For each macromolecule in the cell, we first
tell Phaser whether it is protein or nucleic acid, and how many copies of it there are. There are a number of different ways we can
state what the macromolecule is - we can just provide its molecular weight, the number of
residues or bases, the unformatted sequence string, or the easiest way is just to provide
the sequence file. Giving the sequence file has the advantage
that should we eventually launch AutoBuild from the Results tab then the sequence will
be automatically added. Here we add beta.seq as one macromolecule,
click on "Add macromolecule(s)" and then clicking on the second tab, where we can add blip.seq
to define the other component. It's important to remember that Phaser needs
to know the total content of the asymmetric unit in the crystal, not just what will be
placed as models. The total content is used to figure out what
fraction of the total scattering is explained by each model. The final configuration tab, "Search procedure",
is where we tell Phaser how to use the ensembles we input. We click on the ellipsis and then "add ensemble",
and add beta. We only wish to search for one copy of beta. In this tutorial we also want to search for
a second component, which is the BLIP model. We click on Add search and add a component
to search, and then clicking on the ellipsis we choose BLIP as the model to search with. Note if we just added BLIP to component 1
rather than creating a separate component, this would tell Phaser the wrong thing. It would then search for beta and BLIP as
alternative models for the same component, rather than searching for both of them.. Finally, the order of component 1 and 2 does
not matter, as Phaser will decide which order is optimal. In this case, it will search for beta first
as it is the significantly bigger protein. We now run the job, and it will update the
run status and graph tabs. After about a minute, we see that Phaser has
found 1 solution, and as it has a very high LLG well above 60, and a TFZ score above 8,
we can be reasonably confident that Phaser has found the correct solution. We can then go on and either refine the model
using phenix.refine, or rebuild it completely using AutoBuild. If Coot is installed on your system, we can
view the model in Coot. If you want to follow the steps taken by Phaser
in more detail, you can click on the "Graphs" tab to look at some plots, or click on the
"Run status", which has a button to open a full log file. This would be a very good idea for a difficult
case, if the LLG and TFZ scores tell you that the solution is ambiguous. 

