How to run AlphaFold prediction in Phenix

This tutorial describes how to run AlphaFold
protein structure prediction through the Phenix GUI. Phenix now includes tools that integrate AlphaFold
prediction into the structure determination workflows for both X-ray crystallography and
Cryo-EM. In this video, we will do a short walkthrough
of the structure prediction tool, which can be a very useful first step for any structural
biology project. The innovation of AlphaFold, as well as other
recent prediction tools, is to use machine learning tools to “learn” from the vast
amount of information in the protein databank. These machine learning models find a way to
accurately generate a protein model from a primary sequence, without an explicit understanding
of the underlying physical processes. To run the structure prediction tool, select
the “AlphaFold” top level category in the Phenix GUI. It is worth mentioning that there is a prominent
“help” button, which will open the Phenix documentation in a web browser, which is another
useful resource, then choose “AlphaFold model prediction”. This opens the input and settings dialog. We will first give the job a title. Next we have the option of uploading files,
for example a fasta format sequence file. Alternatively, we could simply copy-and-paste
the sequence into the “Sequence” input box. I will paste a sequence in to demonstrate. Next we will move to the second tab: “Prediction
Settings”. In this tab we can customize options such
as the number of predicted models, whether or not to use templates from the PDB, and
whether or not to perform a multiple sequence alignment to use as input for the prediction. Generally each of these options will improve
the accuracy of your prediction, so by default they are selected. Because of the computational demands of running
alphafold, the actual computations will occur on a gpu machine maintained by the phenix
developers. Your files will be uploaded, the data will
be processed, and the results sent back to your machine. Keep in mind that this will require an active
internet connection to access the remote computing resources. This checkbox allows using precalculated results. If the box is enabled, and your protein sequence
has been used for a previous job with the same parameters, it will send that result
to you without doing a new prediction. This mode gives you an answer quickly, but
if you do want a unique AlphaFold run, you can disable this option. If the “allow precalculated MSA” checkbox
is selected, then the Phenix Server will use a precalculated MSA if your sequence has been
run before. Since the multiple sequence alignment is one
of the more time consuming steps, this is a useful way to speed up the runtime. Because of the computational demands of running
alphafold, the actual computations will occur on a GPU machine maintained by the Phenix
developers. Your files will be uploaded, your data will
be processed, and the result will be sent back to your machine. Each of these steps should happen automatically
within the Phenix job. Keep in mind that this will require an active
internet connection to access the remote computing resources. For this demonstration I will leave all the
settings at default, and select “Run”. The job starts and some logging is visible. To view the number of other users on the server,
the “Server” button at the top right will display a status window. If there are many active jobs, you may have
to wait longer for your job to run. When the job completes, a summary window will
display the resulting files. By scrolling down, some information about
the pLDDT is presented, which is an assessment of AlphaFold’s confidence in the accuracy
of the structure. The pLDDT value of 97.91 is very high, indicating
that this structure has been predicted with very high confidence. Below that is the PAE plot, which stands for
predicted aligned error. This gives you some insight into AlphaFold’s
confidence of pairwise residue orientations. If your protein has multiple distinct domains
this is often apparent by looking at the PAE plot. "This PAE plot does not show any domains,
here is what a plot would look like with multiple domains. Note The bright green rectangles indicate
that pairs of residues within each rectangle have accurate relationships and those between
rectangles do not." FInally I will use the ChimeraX button to
open ChimeraX to examine the predicted structure. We can see it looks like a well folded protein
to the eye. If we then overlay the true structure obtained
from experiment, we can see the ribbon representations align quite well.. By switching to an atom view, we can see that
the prediction is still very similar to the experimental model, but not exactly. Some residues and some loops have visible
differences. In general, AlphaFold predicted this chain
quite accurately, and this predicted model would be very useful as an input to other
Phenix tools such as molecular replacement or real space refinement with a cryo-EM map. 

