How to run real-space-refine

Hi everyone, This tutorial explains how to run phenix.real_space.refine
using the Phenix GUI. Real_space_refine is a tool to refine atomic
models against maps, such as cryo-EM maps. The aim is to obtain a model that fits the
map as well as possible while having a meaningful geometry. To run real_space_refine, the following inputs
are required: a starting model and a map file. If the model contains novel ligands, restraint
definitions need to be supplied as well. For the model, different formats are supported,
such as PDB or mmCIF. The latter is especially useful for very large
structures. For the map, it is possible to use either
CCP4 type .map files (which are a three-dimensional grid of voxels with density values) or .mtz
files (which contain Fourier coefficients). If map files are used, the resolution is also
required. If mtz files are supplied, the resolution
is detected automatically from the map coefficients. Note that the unit cell provided in the model
file should match the box information of the map file or the crystal symmetry information
in the .mtz file. The data for this tutorial are available from
the example datasets which come with the Phenix installation. To set up the tutorial data, open the Phenix
GUI and click on 'New Project'. Then, click on "Set up tutorial data". In the new window, click on the "Tutorial
data" drop down menu. Go down to "Cryo-EM" and choose the second
to last data set, called "MamK double helical filament". The README file gives some information about
the tutorial. Choose a target directory and then click OK. To run phenix.real_space_refine, open the
Phenix GUI. In the panel on the right hand side, choose
"Refinement" and then click on "Real-space refinement", which opens a new window. Go first to the the "input/output" tab. For book-keeping, add a job title. Click "Add file" and select the file "model.pdb". Then add the map. As we use a map file, we have to input the
resolution, which is 3.64 for this example data set. If the output model file should be written
in mmCIF format, check the corresponding box. Then go to the "Refinement settings" tab,
which contains most of the essential options for running real_space_refine. The following refinement strategies are enabled
by default: - Global minimization
- ADP's and
- Local Rotamer fitting The following options are also activated:
- Rotamer restraints - Ramachandran restraints
and - C-beta deviations restraints
Note that the latter cannot yet be de-activated in the GUI. Furthermore, the tool will automatically search
for NCS, and if present, it will attempt to determine NCS groups and use them to define
NCS constraints. The default number of refinement cycles is
set to five, but it can be changed. Set it to 3 for this tutorial, to speed up
the run time. Click the "Run" button on the toolbar to start
the refinement. After starting the refinement job, the "Run
status" tab shows the refinement log file which is updated while the task is running. When refinement is finished, two new tabs,
called "Results" and "Validation" appear. The "results" tab contains the list of output
files. Click the "open in coot" button to see the
map and the final model. The tab "validation" shows validation results. It has several subtabs. The "summary" subtab gives a quick overview
of data, model and model-vs-data quality. Red and yellow highlighted values indicate
warnings and problems, so it recommended to have a closer look. Note that the table is responsive, f.ex. if
you click on the table row corresponding to Rotamer outliers, the GUI will automatically
go to the more detailed "rotamer" section of the Molprobity subtab. From here, you can center on particular outliers
in Coot by simply clicking on the table rows in the Phenix GUI. The model to data fit is shown in the tab
"Model vs. Data". It lists overall correlation coefficients
and features a plot of the CC per residue. The "data" tab gives reports on the input
data, such as Fourier shell correlation plots. It is important to go through all the criteria
of the validation report and to address all problems. If the model was changed, another round of
refinement is needed and this workflow is repeated until the best possible model is
obtained.

