How to run MolProbity (web interface and Phenix GUI)

This video tutorial goes step-by-step through
how to use MolProbity or Phenix to obtain structure validation for your protein or RNA
structures. First MolProbity. Use your favorite web browser to go to molprobity.biochem.duke.edu,
as you can see in my search bar at the top. This takes you to a File Upload page, where
you can either enter a PDB code here to fetch a PDB file directly from the PDB server, or
you can select a PDB file to upload from your local computer here. To select a file, I will click on the Choose
File button, which brings up a file chooser dialog. Here I have an example protein PDB file, which
is the starting model from the phenix refinement ribonuclease Sa tutorial, so I can select
it, and then click Open to set that file for upload. You will see the name of the file shows up
here. Now I can hit the Upload button to upload
that file to the server. You will see that MolProbity performs a number
of checks on the file to ensure that it is a valid PDB format file. Assuming you have uploaded a valid file, MolProbity
presents some basic statistics about the structure, such as the number of chains, residues, etc. Now I can hit the continue button to continue
back to the main MolProbity page. Once you’ve uploaded a structure, the Main
page presents all the analysis options recommended for that structure. The analysis options presented will automatically
change based on what step in the analysis you are at. As discussed in our all-atom contacts tutorial
video, the first step for analyzing a structure is addition of hydrogens. Note the warning box that tells you that if
your structure already had hydrogens, to ensure that they are all of a consistent length,
we remove them from your structure. If hydrogens were removed, there would be
a drop-down menu so you could choose your file with its original hydrogens to analyze
if desired. In general, we recommend trimming and re-adding
hydrogens, so to add hydrogens to this example file, I click on the Add hydrogens option. This takes you to a setup page where you can
decide whether or not to do the automated asn/gln/his flip corrections, and whether
to use electron-cloud or nuclear bond lengths. In general, the default options selected for
you should work fine, so here I click on the “Start adding H” button. This starts the process of adding hydrogens. For most structures this should only take
a few seconds. If you selected the flip corrections, you
will typically be presented with a screen that allows you to review the flips MolProbity
recommends and allows you to select which ones to keep. For this tutorial, we will keep all the flips,
and click on the Regenerate H button. This brings up a popup allowing you to download
the new file with the Hydrogens and the flip corrections. I will click cancel, and then the continue
button to go back to the main page. You will see now that the options have changed
on the main page now that you have a PDB file with hydrogens. You will also see a drop down menu that allows
selection of which file you wish to work on. Selecting a different file changes the analysis
options, based on what’s in the file. You can also scroll down to the file upload
section to upload other files to analyze. For now, we will make sure that the modelFH.pdb
file is selected, and then choose the Analyze all-atom contacts and geometry option. This brings you to a page that lets you customize
your analysis run. Options are presented for the 3D kinemage
file generation and for the result charts. Like in other places in MolProbity, the default
options are customized based on your structure. For example, since this structure has no RNA
residues, the RNA options are turned off. I’m fine with the default options, so I
will scroll down and click on the “Run programs” button to start the analysis. This takes you to a job status page which
periodically updates itself and informs you about what step the analysis is on. This analysis generally takes anywhere from
seconds to minutes to run, depending on the size of your structure. Once complete, this will take you to an output
page, which presents the summary statistics for the options you selected. You can see that this tutorial model is poor
quality, with almost all the validation options shown in red. For a high quality structure these indicators
would be in green. Scrolling down, there is a multi-criterion
3D kinemage file available to download to view in the KiNG software, which I will show
separately later in this video, and there is a multi-criterion chart option also. Single-criterion output options are shown
below the multi-criterion options. For example, you can see a PDF plot of the
distribution of your residues on our six categories of Ramachandran plots. Going back to the summary page, clicking on
the multi-criterion chart option opens a new tab containing a residue by residue listing
of where the problem areas are in your structure. Note that the headers of this chart are sortable,
so you can sort by a particular validation type to pinpoint the worst residues in your
structure. For now, I will use the “close this window”
button to close this tab and return to the summary page. Once you are done with this page, you can
click on the Continue button to go back to the main page. Back at the main page, you will see in the
“Recently generated results” section that the all-atom contacts output has been recorded,
so you can easily get back to those results if needed. You can also go to the popular downloads section
to download a variety of results files, including the html tables, PDF files, and kinemages. If you have any issues during your MolProbity
run, we ask that you use the “Feedback & bugs” link on the left menu to send us an email. Finally, once you are done with MolProbity
session, we kindly ask that you use the “Log out” link on the left menu to help us free
up disk space on the MolProbity server. Once you click on the “Destroy” button
all your files will be permanently deleted from our server. In order to obtain MolProbity validation in
the Phenix GUI, go to the validation tab in the right panel. In this section, there is an option for Comprehensive
validation by MolProbity. Clicking on this option brings up a dialog
box. In the input field for the Input model, you
can click on the Browse button to bring up a file browser dialog, which allows you to
select a structure file to analyze. If all you want is the MolProbity structure
validation, this is all you need to enter. Note that there is also a field for entering
restraints if you have unusual ligands. Also, there is an option to add a reflection
file, which enables model to data validation. If you scroll down, there is an option to
Save a Kinemage file for KiNG to make the multi-criterion kinemage file with all of
the validation markup. This tool automatically adds hydrogens without
doing flip corrections, but there are options to specify whether to keep your original hydrogens
or to use nuclear hydrogen positions. For this video, we will just run the job with
only the PDB file. This will bring up a status box that warns
you that you are only running model validation; we will hit yes to analyze just the structure. This brings up a tab showing the status of
the calculations. Once the calculations are complete, a MolProbity
tab shows up, containing subtabs with all the different results. The Summary tab shows the summary table of
the overall scores for the whole structure. There is also a button to Open the structure
in coot, if you have it installed, so you can see where errors are in the structure. The Basic geometry tab shows issues with the
basic bond lengths and angles. The Protein tab shows the Ramachandran, sidechain
rotamer, and c-beta deviation analysis results. The clashes tab shows the clashes from the
all atom contact analysis. If your structure had RNA, there would be
an RNA tab with the sugar pucker and RNA backbone conformer analysis results. Additionally, there is an Atomic properties
tab, which shows a simple analysis of the occupancies and B-factors of the atoms in
your structure. One particularly useful feature for finding
problem areas is that in all of these results tabs, clicking on an entry in the list will
take you that residue in coot. To view a file in KiNG, either open the standalone
KiNG software, which is freely available for download from our kinemage.biochem.duke.edu
website, or open the version of KiNG that is included with Phenix. Go to the file menu, then to the Open file
option and select the kinemage file you downloaded from MolProbity or generated using Phenix,
like I do here. This allows you to view your structure with
all of the validation markup provided by MolProbity. This concludes our tutorial video. 

