How to use secondary structure restraints

Hi everyone, this tutorial explains how to
generate and apply secondary structure restraints. At resolutions lower than about 3A, refinement
of coordinates may be unstable. In particular, secondary structure elements may be distorted.
However, using specifically designed secondary structure restraints may help preserving their
geometry and slightly distorted elements might be corrected. Note that this applies to refinement
against X-ray or cryo-EM data. First, let's revise secondary structure:
Secondary structure elements of proteins are helices and sheets. Helices can be sub-divided
into 3_10, alpha and pi type, according to the hydrogen bond pattern. For example, the
most common helix is the alpha helix, with hydrogen bonds between the peptide units of
residue n and residue n+4. Sheets can be parallel or antiparallel, depending
on the direction of the main chain. Secondary structure elements for nucleic acids
are base-pairs and stacking pairs. Base-pairs have typically a somewhat planar configuration
and stacking nucleotides are parallel to each other. If secondary structure restraints are enabled,
interactions specific to these elements will be restrained during refinement.
For example in helices, this will be the N...O bond lengths and the following angles:
The N- O - C angle The CA - N - O angle
The C - N - O angle Note that this is in addition to any other
restraints applied, such as usual bond and angle restraints. To apply secondary structure restraints, it
is necessary to supply an annotation, which tells the program which residues belong to
a secondary structure element. Annotations can be supplied in several ways:
- First, they can be stored as HELIX and SHEET records in the model file. The records can
be obtained by using external programs. Also, they are typically present in files downloaded
from the PDB. - Secondly, the phenix.refine and real_space_refine
GUIs can perform the annotations. - Finally, the stand-alone command line tool
phenix.secondary_structure_restraints can supply input files for phenix and it can also
create HELIX and SHEET records. There is also an option to create a pymol script which allows
visualization of bond and angle restraints to be applied, such as in this helix. The
algorithm in the GUI and in this tool is the same. It should be noted that secondary structure
annotation is based on the input model geometry, so a poor input model is likely to generate
a sub-optimal annotation. If a higher resolution homologue model is available, consider using
it for generating the annotations. Now, I will show how to obtain annotations
in the phenix.refine GUI. I will show afterwards where to enable secondary
structure restraints for phenix.real_space_refine. In the main Phenix window, click on "Refinement"
and choose "phenix.refine". In the new window, click "Add file" to add
your model and data files. Make sure that the space group, unit cell parameters and
data labels are correct. Don't forget to add a title for the run.
Then go to the tab "Refinement settings". In the "Targets and weighting" section, enable
the "Use secondary structure restraints" checkbox. Then click on "Select atoms" in the "Strategy"
field. A new window opens. The left-most tab is for
secondary structure, which will not be present if the restraints checkbox was not activated. There are four sub-tabs, called "Helices",
"Beta Sheets", "Base Pairs" and "Stacking Pairs". Click on the "Find Secondary Structure"
button in any of the tabs. A new window opens, which gives options for secondary structure
restraints. If the checkbox "Ignore annotation in file" is disabled, annotations provided
in the input file will be used. If the box is enabled, the program will obtain annotations
using the method specified in the "Search method" drop down menu. For this example, let's use default values.
The program saves the annotation in an .eff file which can be used as reference or as
input file for future refinements. The tabs contain now annotations for secondary
structure elements. Click on the "model" button in the top of the selection editor window,
which opens the model viewer. If you click on any structure element, it will be highlighted,
such as this helix. You can also highlight entire sheets by selecting all lines at once. It is important to double check the secondary
structure assignment, as it may happen that automatic procedures have some errors. For example, lets look at this helix, which
is in chain A and runs from residue 296 to 315.
This is how this helix looks like in isolation. There is a clear bend in the helix. When we
draw the H bonds between peptide units, it can be clearly seen that the network is interrupted.
The restraints algorithm has some safeguards to prevent that f.ex. this O atom and this
N atom are considered bonded. However, it is preferable to supply the correct annotation.
So please check your annotations manually in molecular viewer. If you have corrections, you can input them
in to the selection editor. Let's say we only consider the fragment on the right as alpha
helix. It runs from residue 302 to 315. In the editor, click on the helix and change
the residue range accordingly. Once you think the annotation is correct,
hit "save and close". If you don't have other options to change,
you can start the refinement. To apply secondary structure restraints in
phenix.real_space_refine, use the checkbox in the "Strategy" section and then proceed
to the "select atoms" button.

