Introduction to interactive low-resolution model building with ISOLDE

Hi everyone. I'm Tristan, and I'm very proud to introduce
my new baby ISOLDE. The name stands for Interactive Structure
Optimisation by Local Direct Exploration, but the simplest description is that it's
a new interactive model building environment. In particular, it's designed to ease the often
fraught task of building and refining models into low-resolution maps. So before we get properly started, I'd like
to spend a minute or two discussing why that's important. There's quite a lot going on in this plot,
so let me break it down for you. On the y axis we have the MolProbity score
which combines common measures of structural error, namely atomic overlaps or clashes,
unlikely backbone conformations and unlikely sidechain conformations into a single log-scale
score, where lower is better. On the x-axis we have the R-free, a measure
of how well the model fits the data. Again, lower is better. So the bottom left corner is where we want
to be. Each spot represents one three point five
to four Angstrom crystal structure deposited in the last decade, and is coloured by resolution
from blue for 3.5 to yellow for 4 Angstroms. The problem here isn't just that few models
are in that bottom quadrant, but that it appears that in this resolution range the correlation
between model quality and fit to data - which I should emphasise is very strong at high
resolutions - has broken down essentially completely. In other words, a very poor-quality, physically
impossible model can fit the data much better than a more realistic one. The picture is essentially the same when we
look at cryo-EM models in the same resolution range, except that in this plot the bottom
right-hand quadrant is where we want to be. A somewhat problematic situation. So - how can ISOLDE help to fix it? To answer that, I'll start by taking you through
the essentials using my favourite toy model in the absence of a map, then show how it
all can be applied in a real-world situation. Here we are in ChimeraX, the platform upon
which ISOLDE is built, and I've opened up a model of insulin-like growth factor one. ISOLDE currently supports protein, DNA and
RNA models. Metal ions and water molecules may be included
but should be handled with care. All residues (including any water molecules)
must be complete including hydrogens. Hydrogen atoms can be conveniently added using
ChimeraX's built-in "AddH" command. To run ISOLDE you'll need a recent Linux machine
with a GPU capable of OpenCL or CUDA processing with up-to-date drivers. Support for Mac and Windows environments is
in development. To get it, within ChimeraX go to the Tools
menu and then click "More Tools" to enter the ChimeraX Toolshed, and follow the links
to download and automatically install ISOLDE. Once installed it will appear under Tools/General/ISOLDE. So let's fire it up. The interface loads as a floating window. If your computer has two screens I recommend
putting it on the second, but here I'll dock it into the tool area on the right. For now we're working without any experimental
map, so on the sim settings tab I'll switch over to Free Mode. This will trigger ISOLDE to do some preliminary
analysis of the first loaded model to get it ready for simulation. Starting a simulation is as simple as selecting
anything from a single atom to the entire model, and clicking "Go" - keeping in mind
that for interactive performance the selection size should be kept reasonably small. Here I'll just go ahead and select the entire
model. One of the big challenges of model building
in general lies in the fact that even to the experienced eye it can be very difficult to
tell a reasonable arrangement from a wrong one. This challenge is compounded when the atoms
are actively moving, so a lot of my effort in designing ISOLDE has revolved around finding
ways to make things more intelligible. A particular focus is on providing real-time
visualisation of common geometric problems. The first of these is this traffic-light-style
visualisation of the alpha carbon atoms, which continually updates to give the current status
of each protein residue on the Ramachandran plot. Residues in favoured conformations are coloured
green, while the remainder shade from yellow to dark pink as they become more unlikely. Unlikely sidechain conformations or rotamers,
meanwhile, are annotated with this exclamation mark/spiral motif. These appear only for rotamers outside of
favoured conformations, and change both size and colour according to severity. You may be wondering about that cyan atom
in the middle there. That one has nothing to do with validation
- it's highlighted because it's currently closest to the tip of my three-D haptic interface,
which is represented by the little green cone here. Being able to interact with the model in true
three dimensions like this certainly makes everything much easier, but it's just one
of the options for model interaction in ISOLDE. Most of your day-to-day interaction with ISOLDE
will be through the addition and removal of temporary restraints to guide the simulation
into new conformations. Let's start with rotamer manipulations as
an example. Selecting an atom in a protein residue enables
the rotamer tools, allowing you to cycle through previews of a probability-ordered list of
ideal rotamers. Once you've made a choice you *can* click
"commit" to simply set the new coordinates, but in many cases I find it preferable to
instead click "set target" to force the existing coordinates towards the new conformation. This approach has the substantial advantage
of never introducing atomic clashes, allowing the surroundings to adapt naturally to the
changes. The dihedral restraint mechanism used for
this task is also used for restraining secondary structure and when flipping peptide bonds. It's of course important to always know where
you're applying artificial restraints and how well satisfied they are, so to visualise
dihedral restraints I've settled on this "ring and posts" motif, using both colour and geometry
to show the level of satisfaction of each restraint. Peptide bond geometry controls are found just
above the rotamer controls, and like those are only available when a single mobile protein
residue is selected. These are implemented strictly as dihedral
targets for the same reason as rotamers - that is, the avoidance of very high energy impossible
conformations. In this case the applied restraints are temporary
and will be released when the flipped conformation is reached or if it proves impossible to reach
after a few dozen simulation steps. The cis peptide bond (where the hydrogen and
oxygen are on the same side) is an exceedingly rare natural conformation in non-proline residues,
and is flagged with this red filled-in plane visualisation. All peptide bonds in ISOLDE are restrained
by default so that this type of flip cannot happen by accident. While individual atoms can be tugged directly
using the keyboard and mouse, this can be difficult to do accurately due to the unavoidable
fact that a mouse can only tug in the two dimensions perpendicular to the direction
of view. For large rearrangements, therefore, it's
often easier to make extensive use of temporary position restraints, which can be accessed
at the bottom of the Rebuild tab. These are also useful in various other situations,
for example for keeping sidechain atoms away from unfilled ligand density. If you're particularly eagle-eyed, you may
have been wondering why this IGF-I model is missing its disulfide bonds. I've made it that way on purpose so I can
show my two favourite tools - but before I do that, this would be a very good time to
mention the checkpointing function. This allows you to save a snapshot of the
current state of a running simulation including the coordinates and all current restraints,
and return to it discarding all subsequent changes if you make a mistake. This can be particularly valuable when testing
hypotheses about different possible conformations of a problematic region. Now, on to secondary structure restraints. These combine dihedral restraints with atom-to-atom
distance restraints to force the peptide backbone towards defined conformations - parallel or
anti-parallel beta strands or alpha helices. These are soft enough to still allow reasonable
flexibility, but generally do a good job of attaining the desired conformation even when
it's a very long way from the starting conformation - like, say, if I wanted to turn this entire
IGF-I molecule into an alpha helix. Notice that the imposition of all these extra
restraints doesn't impact on your ability to interact with the model - you can still
pull it around with your mouse or haptic device as much as you like. ... and now you know what IGF-I looks like
as an alpha helix. Just to really demonstrate this, I'm going
to briefly turn ChimeraX's cartoon representation back on and re-calculate secondary structure
using the dssp command. Once done playing, just click "return to checkpoint"
and it's like it never happened. The next tool I'd like to show is the register
shifter. While particularly fun to watch, it has a
serious purpose - at the resolutions ISOLDE is designed for, errors in register - where
stretches of peptide have been assigned one or more whole residues away from their true
positions - are not at all uncommon. In ISOLDE any continuous stretch of peptide
residues can be told to shift smoothly forward or backward along their length, making the
task of recovering from such errors quite straightforward. Moving onto a real-world example, discussed
in much more detail in my upcoming paper on ISOLDE. 3ja8 is a cryo-EM model, and the first published
structure of the eukaryotic MCM-2 helicase. At around five and a half thousand unique
residues and a resolution of three point eight Angstroms its a large and challenging beast,
and at a first glance the PDB validation statistics look pretty good. OK, the high clashscore looks a little problematic,
but nothing stands out as an obvious red flag. Before I get started, a few housekeeping details. To prepare the model for simulation I've used
an external package to add in the many missing sidechains - remember, all residues must be
complete for ISOLDE to work. I've also removed the ADP ligands, since these
are not yet supported. I'll be using position restraints to keep
the surrounding residues out of the ADP density, and add the ligands back in when passing the
final model out to phenix real space refine. Since now we're working with a real experimental
map, we'll be running in map-fitting mode. In this case we need a mtz file with at least
one set of map structure factors. If as in this case you're working with a real-space
map, you can easily convert it using phenix map to structure factors - or why not use
phenix auto sharpen to improve the map interpretability at the same time? Pressing the Initialise button prepares your
map or maps, and also triggers preparation of all dihedrals, rotamers etc. in the model. For a model this size that will take somewhere
between 10 and 30 seconds. When done, the representation will change
to a minimalist cartoon and a scrolling sphere of density which should be familiar to users
of existing crystallographic visualisation and model-building software. In this mode, the mouse scroll wheel changes
the map contour level, while dragging with the right mouse button zooms the display and
dragging with the middle button pans. If you have multiple maps, you can choose
which one responds to the scroll wheel by scrolling with the control key pressed. I strongly recommend switching your density
map to a transparent surface representation as shown here. Note that particularly for cryo-EM maps, you'll
need to adjust the coupling constant between map and simulation using the map settings
dialogue. At present this is a somewhat ad-hoc affair,
but a reasonable heuristic is that the coupling constant times the map one-sigma value (which
you can get from the lower left of the ChimeraX window when adjusting contours) should be
in the range 1 to 10. The first thing we need to do when working
with a new model is to run a short simulation of the entire structure. This gives the molecular dynamics engine the
chance to minimise out the worst of the high-energy features typically found in low-resolution
models. It's particularly important to resolve any
clashes, since these lead to exceedingly high energies - it's not at all uncommon for deposited
models to have initial calculated energies in the tens of millions of kilojoules per
mole! Starting the simulation triggers the map to
be expanded and masked to cover the entire mobile selection. If you like you can adjust the masking radius
in the map settings dialogue, but keep in mind that the mask will be update regularly
during the simulation so the atoms are always in context even after large movements. I'm running this simulation with the Ramachandran
plot visible, because this is the first indication that this model is a bit more problematic
than it might first seem. What we see is an immediate explosion of Ramachandran
outliers - this isn't a failing of ISOLDE, but a consequence of the fact that this largely
hand-built model was refined with Ramachandran restraints. The problem with Ramachandran restraints in
general is that they don't know where in the plot any given residue belongs, but will simply
force it towards the nearest allowed region. What we see here is a consequence of the many
clashes and unfavourable electrostatic interactions in the initial model pushing atoms away from
each other. Sometimes a model has to get worse before
it can get better. While we're looking at the Ramachandran plot,
note that clicking on any point in the plot will take you straight to the corresponding
residue in the main display. Clicking through a few of the newly introduced
outliers we quickly come across a non-proline cis peptide bond, another red flag. Clicking the green "Keep changes" button stops
the simulation and reverts to the standard scrolling display. The rotamer and cis peptide bond annotations
from the simulation remain visible, and they certainly tell a story here. It turns out that this model has over a hundred
spurious non-proline cis bonds, and the number of rotamer outliers has increased from that
seemingly perfect initial zero point one percent to somewhere approaching ten percent of residues. Since cis peptide bonds are such rare and
unusual features and can do strange things to the backbone conformation, checking and
where necessary correcting these is a natural first step in the remodelling process. This can be done conveniently using the peptide
bond validation tool, found underneath the Ramachandran plot on the Validate tab. Like with the Ramachandran plot, clicking
on any entry in the list will take you to that residue and select it. In most cases simply clicking "Go" will give
you a localised simulation big enough to deal with it, but it's always a good idea to look
for signs of larger-scale problems and if necessary stop the simulation and restart
with a bigger selection. While correcting these it may be worthwhile
to fix any other obvious problems you see, but I wouldn't recommend spending too much
time wrestling with individual residues at this stage. First, it's important to remember the golden
rule: human eyes should see each and every residue in context at least once. In other words, we need to go through the
model looking specifically for large-scale errors - there's no point spending all your
time tinkering with the details if some large-scale change is going to wipe out all your hard
work. Looking for large scale errors like register
shifts requires a different style of visualisation. Rather than focusing on individual residues,
we want to be looking at substantial stretches at a time, with just enough surrounding density
to give them context without becoming overwhelming. Currently hiding away at the bottom of the
sim settings tab is a tool for this purpose. Clicking "Step forward" will go to the first
pair of defined secondary structure elements and isolate them along with their flanking
unstructured connections. Each click will step forward in an overlapping
sequence, allowing you to relatively quickly cast your eye over the whole structure. Remember, at this stage you're looking for
signs of serious error - by all means, feel free to correct any obvious smaller-scale
errors you find, but it's counterproductive to spend significant time on challenging spots
until you're sure the surroundings are not going to change substantially. Here I've been doing just that after clearing
away all the cis peptide bonds, and have come across this interesting problem. In the middle of chain 4 we hit a one-residue
break in the chain, where the sequence jumps straight from lysine 467 to valine 469, with
no room for the intervening lysine residue. I can only assume that this came about due
to an error in sequence alignment when generating the initial homology model, but it has gone
undetected and led to a register shift in the following stretch. But how far does this shift reach before the
sequence pops back into register? The only way to find out is to carefully inspect
the following residues for poor fit or unlikely contacts. Examples of what we're looking for here include
over- or underfilled sidechain density, hydrophobic sidechains making close contact with charged
ones, or poor backbone fit to the density, particularly where the backbone appears overly
stretched or bunched up. This leucine residue seemingly attempting
to make a salt bridge with an arginine sidechain is a particularly clear indication that this
helix is out of register, and as we move up we can see that the fit to the following loop
isn't all that great. So we can suspect with some confidence that
the register shift extends at least to here. So let's start up a simulation covering this
stretch and give it a try, keeping in mind that ISOLDE's checkpointing function ensures
that we can play with different possibilities without fear of permanently damaging the model. You can make the necessary selection using
ChimeraX's command-line selection syntax if you like, or you can take advantage of its
handy selection promotion mechanism. If you select a single atom, then pressing
the up arrow will expand the selection first to the whole residue, then to the whole secondary
structure element or loop, and then to the whole chain. Selecting one atom from the helix and each
of its flanking loops then pressing up twice will give you a simulation-ready selection. To induce the register shift, we start by
selecting an atom from valine 469, then using the tools in the register shift dialog to
expand the selection towards the C-terminus until it reaches our hypothesised end. Once you're satisfied with the selection,
set the size of the shift to one - remember, a positive number indicates a shift towards
the C-terminus, and click "make it so". I recommend leaving the shifting restraints
in place until you've had a chance to look over the length of the shifted region, but
when you're satisfied just click "Release". Of course, in most cases you're going to be
left with a few bad rotamers etc. to clean up, but what you're looking for now is evidence
that the new conformation both fits the density and makes physical sense. Remember, it's still not necessarily a good
idea to attempt perfection at this stage, while there's still the possibility that there
are other large errors in the surrounds. Once you're satisfied that the result is essentially
correct - or at least, more correct than before, it's best to move on, then come back later
for the finer-scaled cleanups. Jumping forward a bit, let's take a look at
a few before-and-after stills of this region. Where valine 469 was previously we now have
lysine 468, nicely filling the density and forming a neat double salt bridge with aspartic
acid 431 and glutamic acid 497. Over on the helix we can see that the implausible
contact with leucine 485 was pushing arginine 428 well out of density, but after the shift
the arginine now comfortably continues the complex salt bridge with glu497 and continues
it to glu484. There are various ways you can approach the
remaining cleanups, but that's really a matter of personal preference and the available computational
power. One, the approach I took in this case, is
to use the Ramachandran plot, tackling one outlier at a time. This may seem like a daunting task - but keep
in mind that in the act of solving one you'll often end up solving another half a dozen
nearby, so it's not as big a job as it might seem. The other is to once again work through systematically
end-to-end, this time focusing on all those details that you brushed past the first time. Since this all boils down to repeated application
of the tools I've already demonstrated I won't bore you with it. Instead, let's jump forward to the results. On the top we have the PDB validation sliders
for the original deposited model. On the bottom we have my result after about
a week of work in ISOLDE combined with tightly restrained refinement in Phenix Real Space
Refine. Obviously an improvement, but a simple glance
at these might leave the naive viewer asking, why did it take a whole week to do that? After all, the changes in any one metric are
only a few percent at most. Perhaps this will make things clearer. Here I've plotted the changes in the key peptide
backbone dihedral angles phi, psi and omega, as well as the root-mean-square bulk movement
for every residue in the model. Almost a fifth of all phi and psi dihedrals
have changed by more than forty-five degrees, and almost eight percent of all residues have
moved more than two point five Angstroms. All in all, just under a third of all residues
in the model have had a substantial change in at least one of the listed criteria. To top things off, in keeping with my observation
at the start that there is little to no correlation between fit to data and model quality at these
low resolutions, we can see that despite these extensive changes the Fourier shell correlation
curve between final model and map is essentially indistinguishable from the original. I've developed ISOLDE with the generous support
of Professor Randy Read and the Wellcome Trust. ISOLDE is dependent upon Kevin Cowtan's Clipper
libraries, the wonderful OpenMM molecular dynamics library from Stanford, and of course
ChimeraX from UCSF. I would particularly like to acknowledge the
extensive help I've received from Tom Goddard of the ChimeraX team.

