MolProbity: All atom contacts tutorial

In this video, you will learn the basic concepts
of the all-atom contact analysis used in MolProbity and Phenix. This analysis is used in the calculation of
the clashscore and also as part of the MolProbity score. As implied by the name, a key requirement
for all-atom contact analysis is that your structure has to have all atoms present. Unfortunately, for a variety of reasons, structure
files in the Protein Databank may or may not have hydrogen atoms included, as can be seen
in this example, with the protein backbone shown in white and the sidechain atoms in
cyan. To address this issue, MolProbity includes
software, which is named Reduce, to automatically calculate the positions of the hydrogens using
the heavy atom positions and add them to a file. Here, we have added the hydrogens, shown in
grey. A file without hydrogens is essentially missing
half of its atoms, and hopefully you can see that because hydrogens extend out from the
heavy atoms, without hydrogens, a structure will be missing the majority of its contacts
and will give misleading validation results. To illustrate how we do the all-atom contact
analysis, let’s take a look at this protein structure. We turn on all the atoms, and then zoom in
on this particular region. Here we can show the van der Waals surfaces
of the atoms with this dot representation. Our software, called “Probe”, takes a
tiny ball and rolls it around on these dot surfaces. When the ball just starts to touch another
atom, we can color the dot blue. As the probe ball continues, and the contact
gets closer, we can color those dots green, and then back to blue as the contact gets
further. Moving over here, we can see an example where
the atoms are just touching. Those dots get colored in yellow to indicate
a close contact. Finally, in this region, we can see two examples
of where atoms are overlapping. The overlap on the right is a hydrogen bond,
which is favorable, and gets colored with pale green dots. The overlap on the left is an impossible steric
clash, which gets colored with red spikes to indicate a problem. Note that this doesn’t mean the protein
structure is actually doing this in real life, this is a mistake in the model of that structure. Usually, we think it’s unnecessary to look
at all of the van der Waals surfaces, so we can turn those off, and this way you can see
just the contacts. Furthermore, most output options presented
in MolProbity focus on clashes to encourage people to try to fix them. Here we see a typical example, where the protein
sidechain has several clashes to the protein backbone. In this example, you can see that in the best
case, even with all the hydrogens, everything is just touching and well packed, without
any clashes. MolProbity has several result output options,
as shown here. In the summary table, we show an overall clashscore
for a structure. This clashscore is calculated using the number
of clashes and the number of atoms in your structure, so a lower clashscore means your
structure has less clashes and is generally higher quality. Because this score is normalized by the size
of the structure, this allows you to compare clashscores between structures of a different
size. MolProbity can also create a residue-by-residue
table which shows information about the worst clash, if any, of each residue. MolProbity can also create a kinemage file,
which can be downloaded and viewed in the KiNG 3D visualization software in order to
see the contacts in the context of your structure, like we showed earlier in this video. Similarly, Phenix has several options for
showing the results from all-atom contact analysis. The analysis is run by default during phenix.refine
jobs, which you can see in action in our phenix.refine tutorial. Alternatively, you can run all-atom contacts
as part of the comprehensive validation option. Like in MolProbity, this option gives the
overall clashscore for your structure. It also has button to show the clashes in
the Coot model building software, if you have it installed. Once you have Coot open, you can go to the
Clashes tab in the Phenix window to see a residue-by-residue listing of the clashes,
sorted by the worst clashes. Clicking on a particular residue will go to
that residue in the Coot window, which is particularly convenient for fixing problems. This concludes our quick tutorial video about
the all-atom contact analysis. 

