Phenix tutorial: phenix.refine using default values (GUI)

Hi everybody, This tutorial is about running phenix.refine
via the graphical user interface and using default options. The data for this tutorial are available from
the example datasets which come with the Phenix installation. To run phenix.refine using these data, only
two input files are required: the starting model and the reflection file. In this example, default refinement parameters
are used. To set up the example data, open the Phenix
GUI and click on New Project. In the new window, click on 'Set up tutorial
data' and another window appears. Open the drop down menu next to 'Tutorial
data'. Go down to 'refinement' and choose the first
dataset, called 'ribonuclease Sa'. Don't forget to choose a directory where the
data are to be saved. Then click OK to save the changes. Before explaining how to run phenix.refine,
I want to describe shortly the default refinement parameters. * Atomic coordinates against structure factors
* Atomic coordinates against electron density (this is also called real-space)
* B-factors: Depending on the input model, B-factors are refined isotropically or anisotropically
* The fourth parameter to be refined is the occupancy: By default, the occupancies of
alternate conformations and partially occupied atoms are refined, but a variety of scenarios
for occupancy refinement is possible. * Finally: Bulk solvent and overall scale:
protein crystals contain a considerable amount of solvent, which has to be modeled along
with the atomic features of the protein. The scale factor is used to put the observed
and calculated structure factors to a common scale. Now let's switch to the program and see how
to run it. To do this, open the Phenix GUI. In the panel on the right hand side, choose
Refinement and then click on phenix.refine, which opens a new window. Go to configure and the 'input data' tab. To add the example data, click "Add file"
and select the files from the dialog window. I will first add the model file '. and then
the reflection file. In the box underneath, the space group and
unit cell parameters appear. It is good to check if this is correct. Also, Don't forget to choose the appropriate
data columns with the Data labels drop down menu. Depending on how the data were treated, several
columns may be available. We will use the columns F-obs and SigF-obs. If desired, the high and low resolution limits
can be modified in this section as well. Then, click on the Refinement settings tab,
which contains most of the essential options for running phenix.refine. The first section controls the model parameters
to be refined. The default parameters are already activated:
coordinates, real-space (remember: this means coordinates against electron density), B-factors
and occupancy. The Bulk solvent and scale should be refined
in the majority of cases, this is why it cannot be de-activated in this section. The number of refinement cycles is set to
three, which should be usually sufficient to reach convergence of the parameters. Click the "Run" button on the toolbar to start
the program. When the refinement starts, a new tab will
appear, which contains two inner tabs: Log output and Run status. The latter displays the basic refinement statistics
(such as R-factors, bond and angle deviations, and validation scores). On the left is a list for the current model
and on the right is a plot of the statistics over the course of refinement. While refinement is running, and if Coot is
available on your system, it will be started and the current model and maps will be automatically
loaded each time they change. Once the job completes, additional tabs will
appear reporting the output files, final statistics and a variety of validation criteria. The final statistics show amongst others the
crystallographic R-factors. The gap between R and Rfree is rather large,
it seems therefore that the default strategy of phenix.refine was not optimal for this
data set. Refer to the description of the RNase tutorial
in the Phenix documentation to see a more appropriate strategy, which also involves
TLS. It is important to go through all the validation
criteria and to make sure that there are no problems. If there are problems, they should be fixed. For example, the Ramachandran plot can be
found under Molprobity in the 'protein tab'. Outliers are marked with a red circle. Click on it and coot will automatically center
on the problematic part. Similarly, it is possible to center on the
clashes. Go to the clashes tab and click on a clash
in the list. These two oxygen atoms f.ex. are rather close
and their position should be corrected before moving on.

