Running Emplace_local via ChimeraX

Hi everyone, This tutorial explains how to run emplace_local, 
a tool that docks a model in a cryo-EM map.   It is assumed that you have already 
set up the Phenix/ChimeraX extension.   In case you need it, our channel has a 
separate video that explains this process.  Before demonstrating how to run the program, 
let's briefly discuss the challenges of docking.   The difficulty of docking tasks can vary greatly, 
depending on the quality of the reconstruction.   It can be trivial when the map is good, 
and distinct features of the search model   can be identified by eye. However, it can 
be very challenging when there is barely   enough signal to assess if a docked 
model agrees with a very noisy map. To address these challenges, the em_placement tool 
improves docking calculations by considering the   log-likelihood-gain - or LLG - score that 
would be expected for a correct solution   given the quality of the data and the model. 
Following this strategy, the program compares   and analyzes half-maps to determine signal and 
noise power as smooth functions in Fourier space.   This information is used to search over the full 
map to place a model. If you want to know more   about the details of the algorithm, have a look 
at the two papers linked in the video description.  When you have an idea of where the 
model or a component might be located,   it’s faster and more sensitive to do a local 
search with the emplace_local version of the   em_placement tool. The most convenient way to 
carry out this local search is inside ChimeraX. The bottom line is that the strategy using 
the LLG score can successfully place models   into very noisy low-resolution maps. We 
will see an example of that in a moment.  To run emplace_local, you will need two half-maps,   and the model that you want to 
place in the reconstruction.  Note that the statistical analysis requires 
the half-maps to correspond to the full volume   of the cryo-EM reconstruction, 
so cut-out boxes cannot be used.  Here is how you run emplace_local via ChimeraX. 
Open a map and the model that you want to dock. In our first example, we are going to use a 
1.7 Å reconstruction of the membrane domain   of the GABA receptor in which we will dock 
chain A of the 4cof crystallography model.   The two half maps are colored in 
green, the model is shown in purple.  To start the job, go to "Tools", choose "Phenix" 
in the dropdown, then select "Local EM fitting".  In the new window, you can select the input files. 
Make sure the appropriate model and half-maps are   selected. If you know the map resolution, it’s 
best to put the value in the corresponding field.   Otherwise, the program will make a reasonable 
guess for you. Finally, you can specify the   region of the map into which the model should be 
docked. You will be able to interactively adjust   the center of the search region, but here you can 
choose how to specify its preliminary position. You can either use the center of 
view, the center of a map or a model,   or give specific coordinates. Here 
we are going to use the center of   view. So make sure the map is centered 
in the ChimeraX window. Then click OK. A transparent orange marker will appear in the 
main window. emplace_local will try docking   the search model into that sphere. So let's 
move the sphere so that it encloses the map   region into which we want to dock the search 
model. To move the sphere, goto markers and   activate the "move" option. Now you can move the 
sphere by clicking on your right mouse button. This position should be OK, as it encompasses the 
part of the map that resembles the search model.   Now you can click "start search".
You can see the status of the job   in the lower left bar of the chimeraX window. 
This particular example will take about 1-2 min.   Once the search is complete, the model has 
been moved to its docked position. The log   window indicates the log-likelihood-gain and map 
CC. A LLG score greater than 60 suggests that a   solution is significantly better than random.
Here we have a value above 4,000, along with   a map correlation of 0.76, suggesting 
that the docking task was successful.   If we look at how the model was placed, we can 
see that it fits nicely into the map. We can   also compare the docked model to the deposited 
model of this map, they superpose very well.  Once the model or all domains have been 
placed into the map, you can move on to   automated rebuilding, loop_fitting or refinement. Now let’s look at an example for a docking 
task in a noisy low-resolution map. We will   place subunit L of PDB entry 3rko (a crystal 
structure) in the very bad cryo-EM density   of respiratory complex I (EMDB: 12654) for the 
same subunit of PDB entry 7nyu. While the nominal   resolution of this map is 3.8Å, the region 
of subunit L has a local resolution of 9-11Å.  Let’s proceed as before and move the search sphere 
in the region where we think the model should be.   The job finishes in about a minute, and 
produces a solution with a LLG above 120.   The model superposes well with the corresponding 
subunit of the deposited structure.   Although it would have been immensely 
challenging to manually place this   model into the map, the emplace_local tool 
automatically found the correct location. Likelihood-based signal and noise analysis 
for docking of models into cryo-EM maps  https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798323001596
Likelihood-based docking   of models into cryo-EM maps
https://doi.org/10.1107/S2059798323001602

