Running Phenix via ChimeraX: setup

Hi everyone. This tutorial explains how to install the
Phenix extension for ChimeraX. This extension allows you to run certain Phenix
tools via the ChimeraX Molecular Viewer. First, install a daily build of ChimeraX. You can download the build from the website
- the address is in the video description below - and follow the installation instructions
for your operating system. You also need a recent nightly build of Phenix. The address is also given in the video description. Finally, you'll need the Phenix UI bundle. You can download it from the ChimeraX Toolshed
website or you can install it directly from the GUI. Here is how to install the bundle with the
GUI: Go to the "Tools" menu and then select "More Tools". In the new window, click on "All Bundles"
and scroll down to find the PhenixUI. Click "install" und confirm in the prompt. Now that you have all programs installed,
you need to link the Phenix installation to ChimeraX. If Phenix is installed into its default location,
ChimeraX will normally find it. Otherwise, type "phenix location", followed
by the path_to_your_phenix_installation, for example "phenix location /Applications/phenix-dev-4753". Note that you can also drag and drop the phenix
top directory onto the command line instead of having to type out its path. You can see the syntax of the supported phenix
commands with “usage phenix”. To run a Phenix tool via the GUI, go to "Tools",
and then choose "Phenix" in the dropdown. Here is a quick preview of running the water
placement tool "phenix.douse": In the "Phenix" dropdown, choose "Water placement". Choose the model to which water molecules
should be added, and the corresponding map. Input the map resolution and hit "OK". The computation typically takes one or several
minutes, depending on the size of the model. In the result window, you can see a table
that lists the number of hydrogen bonds and the map density value for each water molecule
added by phenix.douse. If the input model already had water molecules,
there are additional columns for waters that were not found by douse, and for waters that
are both in the input model and found by douse. Toolshed
https://cxtoolshed.rbvi.ucsf.edu Phenix nightly build
https://phenix-online.org/download/nightly_builds.cgi ChimeraX daily build
https://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimerax/download.html

