SAD phasing using AutoSol

Hi Everyone. This tutorial explains how to solve a structure
by SAD phasing using AutoSol. "SAD" is a widely used experimental phasing
technique and stands for Single Wavelength Anomalous diffraction. The technique consists of measuring X-ray
diffraction data using energies close to the absorption edge of an anomalous scatterer. These scatterers can be purposely incorporated
into the sample, such as by replacing methionine with selenomethio- nine or the scatterers
can be naturally present. The following inputs are needed to run AutoSol:
1. anomalous diffraction data. This is a data file that contains separate
intensities for each Friedel pair. The intensities are commonly called I plus
and I minus. 2. the wavelength, at which the data where collected
3. the atom type of the anomalous scatterer
and 4. the sequence of the molecule in the crystal AutoSol will perform the following steps:
- first, the program locates the anomalously-scattering atoms. The resulting set of coordinates is called
the sub-structure, because it is just a part of the structure of the molecule in the crystal. - then the sub-structure and the anomalous
data are used to estimate crystallographic phases and calculate a density map. - this initial density map can be improved
with density modification - Finally, the map is interpreted by building
a preliminary model that matches the map. To run this tutorial, we will use example
data coming with the Phenix installation. Open the Phenix GUI, then Click "New Project"
and choose "Set up tutorial data". Select the first tutorial dataset "P aerophilum
translation initiation factor 5a (SAD)". Choose an appropriate location to save the
files and Click OK. To start the program, go to the right panel
and click on "experimental phasing". Then click on "AutoSol" and a new window opens. For bookkeeping add a job title. To load files, click on "Browse" and double-click
on "seq.dat". The GUI now lists this file and assigned a
data type to it. seq.dat is correctly listed as a "sequence"
file. If you want to look at the file, click on
the magnifying glass. Then load the data file, p9.sca, which is
in scalepack format. The GUI has correctly guessed that this is
a SAD or MAD peak wavelength data set and also assigned the correct labels: I+ SIGI+
I- SIGI-. If there are several data arrays in the reflection
file, it is good to double-check the data type and the labels to make sure that they
are correct. To enter the wavelength, go to the box next
to the Greek lambda symbol. For this experiment, the wavelength was 0.9792. To input the atom type, enter Se for selenium
into the Atom box. If we had measured the f' and f" scattering
factors, they would be entered as well. But they are not mandatory as they can be
calculated from the atom type and the wavelength. We leave the boxes empty for this tutorial. We can also enter the number of NCS copies
and sites if they are known. Otherwise the program will guess them based
on the volume taken up by a molecule with the provided sequence, the volume of the asymmetric
unit, and the assumption that about 50% of the crystal is occupied by the molecule. Finally, check that the Unit cell (113.9 113.9
32.5, 90 90 90) and the space group (I4) match those of your data collection. Then Click on the "Options and output' tab. Default options are typically fine, but to
speed up the runtime of this tutorial, set the high-resolution limit to 3 A and the number
of processors to 4. Then go to "RUN" and click on "RUN NOW" to
start the program. A new tab, labeled run_1 will appear next
to the configure tab. The Status tab on the left shows what is happening
now. More tabs will appear while the program is
running and they will be constantly updated. Let's have a look through some of the tabs
of the finished AutoSol run. The "Graphs" tab shows the quality of phasing
as expressed by figure of merit vs resolution. The Figure of Merit is an estimate of phase
quality, ranging from 0 to 1. It normally falls off with resolution. Acentric reflections, which have anomalous
differences that yield phase information, have higher figures of merit than centric
reflections, which have no anomalous differences. The "Substructure Search" tab shows the heavy-atom
sites obtained. For SAD, a figure of merit above 0.45 is very
good, and between 0.25 and 0.45 is fine. The Overall Score is the estimated correlation
coefficient between your experimental map and the true map, multiplied by 100. The higher this number is, the better the
solution. Select a solution and click on "show selected
sites" which will list below the atom type, coordinates, and occupancy for each site. The occupancies should normally all be similar,
but they might not all be equal to 1 if the scattering factors are not quite right or
if there are partially occupied sites. The "Phasing and density modification tab"
allows visualizing the anomalous sites and density maps from this AutoSol run. Highlight the first solution and click on
"view sites and experimental map" and then "open in coot". A Coot window opens showing the map before
density modification. Go to "Edit", choose "map parameters" and
set the map radius to 35 to see more of the map. Go to "Draw" and then "Go to Atom", click
"Chain Z" and then click on the first atom in the list to zoom in on one of the selenium
sites. Now the view is centered near this atom. Notice that the map has regions that are mostly
empty (the solvent) and regions that have more density (the protein). If we zoom in, we can see some density representing
protein chain, but it is not very clear. Go back to the "phasing and density modification
tab". The lower part shows the solution from density
modification. An R-factor below 0.3 is ideal but a low value
does not guarantee a usable solution. Note that this is the R-factor for density
modification, not the crystallographic R-factor for model vs. data. The "skew" is a measure of the deviation of
the distribution of electron density values in the raw phased map from a Gaussian; a skew
of 0.2 is usually very good. Highlight solution 1 in the lower part. Click on "view sites and resolve map" and
then "open in coot". The density-modified map appears on top of
the experimental map in the Coot window. To hide the previous map, click on "display
manager" and uncheck ("phaser_1.mtz"). The density modified map is greatly improved,
as the density shows connected volumes for the protein chain. The summary tab shows final statistics and
output files. The correct solution in this case is unambiguous
based on visual inspection, the refinement R-factors, and the correlation coefficient. To open the model and final map click "Open
in Coot." Select the first atom in chain A to center
on the molecule. This is a very clear map. You can get this sort of result with AutoSol
if you have accurately measured high-resolution anomalous data with strong anomalous signal,
as in this tutorial dataset. In more challenging cases, the map might be
less clear and less model built. Note that the final model from AutoSol is
rarely complete and may contain errors. The next step is usually to run phenix.autobuild,
which tries to iteratively improve the map with density modification and build a more
complete model. To run AutoBuild with the results of this
AutoSol run, hit the "run AutoBuild" button in the summary tab.

