Scaling and merging anomalous data

Today we are going to learn about scaling
datasets using scale-and-merge in the Phenix GUI. The purpose of Phenix scale and merge is to
combine data from multiple crystals. Let's see how scale and merge works. The key features of scale and merge are local
scaling and automatic assessment of inter-crystal variation. Let's look at local scaling . We use the intensities
from one crystal as a reference, and scale the intensities of another crystal to that
reference. We use a scale factor that is local so that
it can take account of effects such as absorption that vary across the diffraction pattern. Let's get the scale factor for a particular
reflection. We take the average intensity for all the
reflections in a sphere surrounding the reflection in the reference crystal, and compare it with
the average intensity for all the same reflections in the crystal we want to scale. We leave out the reflection we are going to
scale so we don't bias the result. This gives us a scale factor for this reflection
and we can multiply our measured value by the scale factor to give a scaled intensity. The process is repeated for each other reflection
to give a scaled dataset. Now lets look at merging data obtained from
several crystals. We want the anomalous data corresponding to
an ideal crystal. We will use amplitudes (F) instead of intensities
as that is what scale and merge uses. What we have is data measured from several
real crystals. To optimally combine these data we need to
keep in mind that these crystals are actually different and consider the crystal-to-crystal
variation. Let's imagine how the data we measure are
related to the F+ and F- for an ideal crystal. If we measured data from an ideal crystal
the observed F+, fobs would be the ideal F+ with some error in measurement sigma-obs. Now if we measure data from a real crystal,
the observed F+ will be the ideal F+, with errors in measurement, sigma obs, and also
variation between this crystal and the ideal one, sigma-crystal-A. Now when combining observations
of a particular reflection, we can weight each observation based on the error in measurement
and the inter-crystal variation. The weights are one over the squares of the
sigmas, so big sigmas mean small weights. We can estimate the inter-crystal variation
for each crystal from the differences between the data for each crystal and the average
of all crystals. The data from crystals that are most similar
to the average are weighted more strongly, and the data from crystals that are more different
are weighted less. Here is the procedure for scaling and merging. The data are first locally scaled to the average
of all datasets. Then the observations from each crystal are
combined, taking both uncertainties in measurement and inter-crystal variation into account,
to produce scaled anomalous data. Note that you can use scale-and-merge with
native data (without anomalous differences) as well. Let's apply scale-and-merge to some data from
the phenix tutorials. We are going to use some very weak data from
an NS1 protein. We will scale just 4 datasets to see how it
works. In the main phenix GUI, click on "new project"
and then "set up tutorial data". In the pull-down menu under "OTHER" select
the "NS1 low-resolution SAD data tutorial". Choose a suitable place to put the files and
hit OK Now there will be a new ns1-scale-and-merge
project listed for you. Let's run scale_and_merge. Under "Reflection Tools" select "scale and
merge". let's enter a title. Let's find the data in the tutorial directory. Under "anomalous data file" hit browse and
pick all 4 data files one by one, using the plus sign to add additional files. You can also make a directory and put all
your files in it and just specify that directory. The data for scale-and-merge should be unmerged
original index data. That means that the data files have individual
observations kept separate and record the original hkl indices of the data. If we scroll down notice that the unit cell
box is empty. This means that the data files we used, which
are scale pack unmerged format, do not specify the unit cell. Let's put it in now. Let's look at some of the parameters that
are set for us by default. "Require F+ and F-" means only include an
observation of F+ if the corresponding F- is present in the same dataset. This helps reduce systematic errors by always
pairing reflections measured from the same crystal. Scrolling up, if we click on the Scaling button,
the "Make anisotropy uniform" parameter is set to True so that anisotropy for each datafile
will be adjusted to match the average. Under Merging notice that we have chosen to
include the inter-dataset variance. We have also chosen to optimize anomalous
differences. If we were using non-anomalous data we might
turn that off. We're ready to go. Hit Run and as scale and merge starts, a new
scale and merge run will appear. The Log status tab will show the log file. Let's look at some parts of this log file. First each dataset is scaled with local scaling. Notice that the anisotropy in the data files
is examined so that it can be made uniform. The datafiles are first scaled using just
an overall scale factor to put them on similar scales. Then the data are scaled using just the original
sigmas, without inter-dataset variation. The inter-dataset variation is estimated by
comparing each dataset to the average and accounting for measurement errors. And the data are scaled again, including inter-dataset
variation. Finally the half-dataset anomalous correlation
is estimated by splitting the datasets into two groups and comparing the anomalous differences
between groups. The summary page shows the half-dataset anomalous
correlations. For these NS1 crystals using just 4 datasets
it is pretty poor even at low resolution. A value of 0.3 in a resolution range is useable,
but you would hope for something above 0.5 in at least your lower resolution shells. For these NS1 crystals, it took not 4 but
27 crystals to yield a useful set of merged data. 

