Simulate a SAD experiment with phenix.plan_sad_experiment

Today we are going to lean how to use plan-sad-experiment
in the Phenix GUI to see if our SAD experiment is going to work. The purpose of Phenix plan sad experiment
is to simulate a SAD experiment and to estimate the probability that you are going to be able
to find the sites and solve your structure. Let's see how plan sad experiment works. There are two key steps in solving a structure
by SAD phasing. These are finding the substructure of anomalously-scattering
atoms, and calculating a map that can be interpreted. The anomalous signal is going to determine
your chances of finding the substructure, and the anomalous correlation is going to
determine the quality of your map. The anomalous signal is the peak height in
an anomalous difference Fourier such as the yellow peaks in this picture. The anomalous signal is essentially the information
per site in the anomalous differences. We will see that the substructure is likely
to be found if the anomalous signal S is about 10 or greater. The anomalous correlation CCano is the correlation
of your anomalous differences with ideal ones for your structure. It represents the accuracy of your anomalous
data and it determines the accuracy of phasing and therefore the quality of the map that
you can obtain. The anomalous signal is the key to finding
the substructure. Here are the things that are going to determine
your anomalous signal S. S is proportional to the anomalous correlation. It is proportional to the square root of the
ratio of the number of reflections to the number of sites. It is reduced if the anomalous sub-structure
is not well ordered. We can plan a SAD experiment by simulating
the anomalous signal that we would expect to obtain. The anomalous signal is going to depend on
the I over sigma of the data (the accuracy of the data). It will depend on the anomalous atom based
on the wavelength and scattering factor for this atom. It will depend on the number of sites, and
the resolution. It will depend indirectly on the sequence
of your macromolecule, particularly at wavelengths longer than about 1.7 Angstroms, because oxygen
and other atoms in your structure will contribute to the anomalous scattering in a way that
amounts to noise. Putting all these together we can estimate
the anomalous signal. Let's calculate the expected anomalous signal
in a real dataset. In the main phenix GUI under "Experimental
phasing" select "Plan SAD experiment". A new Plan Sad experiment window will open. Put in a job title to help you remember what
you were testing with this run Enter the anomalously-scattering atom. Let's use Se for selenium and set the wavelength
to the peak at 0.9792 A. Lets assume as a rather typical case that
we have 12 sites, a high-resolution limit of 2 A, a solvent fraction of about 0.5, and
500 residues. You could enter a sequence file if you wanted
to instead of specifying the number of residues. Now a key parameters in plan_sad_experiment
is the target anomalous signal. The GUI is going to try and achieve the target
anomalous signal you specify by adjusting the I over sigma of the data to be collected. If you specify a high anomalous signal it
will require more accurate data than a low one. We're ready to go. Hit Run and after a few moments you will get
this Result panel. It summarizes the information you typed in,
along with the characteristics of the anomalous scatterer, Se in this case. Notice the f double prime value of 3.84, which
is quite high. The summary then lists, as a function of the
high-resolution limit, the number of reflections, the I over sigma chosen by the GUI, the resulting
half-dataset correlation and estimated anomalous correlation, the anomalous signal obtained,
the probability that you will solve this structure with this data, and the expected figure of
merit or quality of your SAD-phased map. In this case, a value of 20 for I over sigma
is required to obtain a half-dataset correlation of 0.32 and the target anomalous signal of
15. The probability of solving the structure with
this data would be about 83% and the expected figure of merit would be 0.31. This is using all data to a resolution of
3 A. Now let's see what would happen if everything
were the same except we had only sulfur as the anomalous scatterer and we collected the
data at a wavelength of 1.8 A. In this case the f double-prime is only 0.74,
much less than the 3.84 we found for selenium. Now we find that it takes an I over sigma
of 98 to get a half-dataset CC of 0.29 an an anomalous signal of 15. Compare this with a required I over sigma
of just 20 for the selenium experiment. The probability of solving this structure
with this data is still 83% and the expected figure of merit of phasing is 0.3. If you want to test out more possibilities,
try changing the target anomalous signal and you can see what I over sigma would be required
to get each value you choose. 

