Using an AlphaFold model for molecular replacement

Hi everyone,
This tutorial shows how to use 
an AlphaFold model for molecular replacement. In particular, it illustrates the case when a 
model has been predicted without templates or   homologue structures.
Our example uses data 
from the protein POMGNT2. In February 2021,   when the first AlphaFold database was 
trained on models in the PDB, no detectable   homologues of POMGNT2 were available, and the 
structure was not yet published.
Since then,   two groups determined the structure of POMGNT2. 
We will use the diffraction data from one of these   structures for our tutorial.
[If you are new to 
using molecular replacement, it may be useful   to watch the MR video tutorial first.]
To set up 
the example data, open the Phenix GUI and click on   "New Project". In the new window, click on 'Set 
up tutorial data' and another window appears.   Open the drop-down menu next to 'Tutorial data'. 
Go down to 'Molecular replacement' and choose   POMGNT2. Indicate a directory where the data are 
to be saved. Then click OK to save the changes. Predicted models often come with 
residue-by-residue estimates of uncertainty. We   can use this information to remove low-confidence 
residues and break the model into domains. Let's have a look at the 
AlphaFold model of POMGNT2.   We can visually separate the structure 
into three domains. The yellow colors in   the model tell us that the residues connecting 
the domains have low confidence. The predicted   aligned error plot then can tell us how certain 
the relative positions of the domains are. We see that there are three domains, represented 
by the three dark green areas along the diagonal   in the plot. Each corresponds to a domain 
that we visually identified in the structure,   and AlphaFold is confident about the distances 
between all pairs of residues within each domain.   The small square in the upper left 
corresponds to the long helix in the right,   the large square in the center of the plot 
corresponds to the large domain in the middle,   and the square in the lower right represents 
the smaller domain on the left. The light green   areas away from the diagonal in the plot suggest 
that the relative orientations of the domains are   uncertain.
So before doing MR, we will use the 
process_predicted_model tool to break the model   into domains.
Note that the model preparation step 
should always be carried out, even if there are no   domains, because it's essential to translate 
the confidence measure stored in the B-factor   field. The confidence measure (or pLDDT) 
goes from 0 to 100 for bad to good, but if   it's interpreted as a B-factor it will give thew 
strongest weight to the worst parts of the model.   The process_predicted_model task translates 
the pLDDT into a B-factor that appropriately   downweights the worst parts of the model.
Go to 
the Phenix GUI. In the panel on the right-hand   side, choose 'AlphaFold' and then 'Process 
predicted model'. For book-keeping, put a   job title. To enter the predicted model, click 
'browse' and choose 'AF-Q8NAT1-F1-model_v1.pdb'.   Then click on 'optional input files' and click 
'browse' next to the PAE file input field. Choose   the .json file in the tutorial directory, which 
contains the predicted aligned error matrix.   Click 'OK' to close the window. We leave all other 
parameters at their defaults, then click 'Run'   to start the program.
Once finished, the program 
has separated the AlphaFold model into 3 chains:   A1, A2 and A3. We will ignore chain A1, the 
long helical domain, as it corresponds to a   membrane anchor helix that was left out of the 
soluble construct made for crystallization.   Note that the program also purged some 
low confidence residues from the model.   It also indicates the number of residues in each 
domain.
We will now use the program 'PDB Tools' to   create two separate model files, one for chain A2 
and one for chain A3. In the main Phenix window,   go to 'Models: modification, minimization and 
dynamics'. Then choose 'PDB tools'. Enter a   job title. Click 'add file' and choose the output 
file from the 'process predicted model' program.   Choose an output filename, such as domain2. 
Go to the 'options' tab and put 'chain A2'   into the 'Keep only atom selection' field. Click 
'run'. When it is finished, run the program again,   this time with the selection 'chain A3'; and don't 
forget to change the output file name to domain3.   The output files will be in separate subfolders in 
your tutorial directory.
Now we are ready to run   MR! In the main Phenix window, choose 'Molecular 
Replacement' and then 'Phaser-MR (full-featured)'.   For bookkeeping, give your job a title. Ensure 
that the Phaser mode is 'Automated molecular   replacement'. Then we add the file with the 
diffraction data. Phenix automatically populates   the unit cell and the space group fields from the 
file; quickly check to ensure that the correct   information is used.
Then go to the Ensembles 
tab. In this run, we will only use one model   for each component, but you can use an ensemble of 
alternative models when you run MR on your data. We start by defining the first domain. Give the 
first search model a name, here 'domain2'.   Click on 'Add file' to add the model file. Let's 
change the estimated error or 'Variance', we will   specify it with an RMSD of one Angstrom. Then 
click OK.
Now let's add the second search model.   Click the 'Add PDB ensemble' button, and then 
click on Ensemble 2. We name this one 'domain3'   and this time we add the file domain3.pdb. Again, 
the RMSD is 1 Angstrom.
Go to the "ASU contents"   tab. For each molecule in the asymmetric unit, we 
tell Phaser whether it is protein or nucleic acid,   and how many copies exist. The size of each 
component can be specified in a number of ways,   but it is usually most convenient to use the 
sequence of the protein you crystallized. Make sure the 'Chain type' is set to 'protein'. 
Change the number of copies to 2, specify the ASU   contents as 'Sequence file' and select the 
file with the sequence of the construct.  In the "Search procedure" tab, we tell Phaser 
how to use the ensembles. Next to 'Component 1',   click on the ellipsis. Choose "add ensemble", and 
add domain2. We search for two copies of domain2.   To search also for the other 
domain, click on 'Add search'   and add a component. Clicking on the ellipsis, 
we choose domain3 as second component. Search   for two copies.
Click 'Run' to start the job. The 
GUI will update the run status and graph tabs.  After about 10 minutes, Phaser has found 1 
solution with a very high LLG and TFZ. We   can be reasonably confident that this solution is 
correct. 
If we don't break the model into domains   and use instead the AlphaFold model "as is", then 
Phaser can still find a solution in this case.   However, the small domain is not well placed, as 
can be seen in this screenshot. The residues do   not fit the density; when we overlay the deposited 
model from the PDB, we see that the orientation   of the small domain is different. To fix this, 
significant manual work or re-building is needed.   In contrast, when we search for two domains, 
the residues fit the density very well. 

